Educated is a work of nonfiction. Some names and identifying details have been changed.
Copyright © 2018 by Second Sally, Ltd.
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Random House, an imprint and division of Penguin Random House
LLC, New York.
RANDOM HOUSE and the HOUSE colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House
LLC.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
NAMES: Westover, Tara, author.
TITLE: Educated : a memoir / Tara Westover.
DESCRIPTION: New York : Random House, [2018]
IDENTIFIERS: LCCN 2017037645 | ISBN 9780399590504 | ISBN 9780399590511 (ebook)
SUBJECTS: LCSH: Westover, Tara—Family. | Women—Idaho—Biography. | Survivalism—Idaho—
Biography. | Home schooling—Idaho—Anecdotes. | Women college students—United States—
Biography. | Victims of family violence—Idaho—Biography. | Subculture—Idaho. | Christian
biography. | Idaho—Rural conditions—Anecdotes. | Idaho—Biography.
CLASSIFICATION: LCC CT3262.I2 W47 2018 | DDC 270.092 [B]—dc23
LC record available at lccn.loc.gov/2017037645
International ISBN 9780525510673
Ebook ISBN 9780399590511
randomhousebooks.com
Book design by Barbara M. Bachman, adapted for ebook
Cover illustration: Patrik Svensson
v5.2
ep
Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Epigraph
Author’s Note
Prologue
Part One
Chapter 1: Choose the Good
Chapter 2: The Midwife
Chapter 3: Cream Shoes
Chapter 4: Apache Women
Chapter 5: Honest Dirt
Chapter 6: Shield and Buckler
Chapter 7: The Lord Will Provide
Chapter 8: Tiny Harlots
Chapter 9: Perfect in His Generations
Chapter 10: Shield of Feathers
Chapter 11: Instinct
Chapter 12: Fish Eyes
Chapter 13: Silence in the Churches
Chapter 14: My Feet No Longer Touch Earth
Chapter 15: No More a Child
Chapter 16: Disloyal Man, Disobedient Heaven
Part Two
Chapter 17: To Keep It Holy
Chapter 18: Blood and Feathers
Chapter 19: In the Beginning
Chapter 20: Recitals of the Fathers
Chapter 21: Skullcap
Chapter 22: What We Whispered and What We Screamed
Chapter 23: I’m from Idaho
Chapter 24: A Knight, Errant
Chapter 25: The Work of Sulphur
Chapter 26: Waiting for Moving Water
Chapter 27: If I Were a Woman
Chapter 28: Pygmalion
Chapter 29: Graduation
Part Three
Chapter 30: Hand of the Almighty
Chapter 31: Tragedy Then Farce
Chapter 32: A Brawling Woman in a Wide House
Chapter 33: Sorcery of Physics
Chapter 34: The Substance of Things
Chapter 35: West of the Sun
Chapter 36: Four Long Arms, Whirling
Chapter 37: Gambling for Redemption
Chapter 38: Family
Chapter 39: Watching the Buffalo
Chapter 40: Educated
Dedication
Acknowledgments
A Note on the Text
About the Author
The past is beautiful because one never realises an emotion at
the time. It expands later, & thus we don’t have complete
emotions about the present, only about the past.
—VIRGINIA WOOLF
I believe finally, that education must be conceived as a
continuing reconstruction of experience; that the process and
the goal of education are one and the same thing.
—JOHN DEWEY
This story is not about Mormonism. Neither is it about any other form of
religious belief. In it there are many types of people, some believers, some
not; some kind, some not. The author disputes any correlation, positive or
negative, between the two.
The following names, listed in alphabetical order, are pseudonyms: Aaron,
Audrey, Benjamin, Emily, Erin, Faye, Gene, Judy, Peter, Robert, Robin,
Sadie, Shannon, Shawn, Susan, Vanessa.
I’
m standing on the red railway car that sits abandoned next to the barn.
The wind soars, whipping my hair across my face and pushing a chill down
the open neck of my shirt. The gales are strong this close to the mountain,
as if the peak itself is exhaling. Down below, the valley is peaceful,
undisturbed. Meanwhile our farm dances: the heavy conifer trees sway
slowly, while the sagebrush and thistles quiver, bowing before every puff and
pocket of air. Behind me a gentle hill slopes upward and stitches itself to the
mountain base. If I look up, I can see the dark form of the Indian Princess.
The hill is paved with wild wheat. If the conifers and sagebrush are
soloists, the wheat field is a corps de ballet, each stem following all the rest
in bursts of movement, a million ballerinas bending, one after the other, as
great gales dent their golden heads. The shape of that dent lasts only a
moment, and is as close as anyone gets to seeing wind.
Turning toward our house on the hillside, I see movements of a different
kind, tall shadows stiffly pushing through the currents. My brothers are
awake, testing the weather. I imagine my mother at the stove, hovering over
bran pancakes. I picture my father hunched by the back door, lacing his
steel-toed boots and threading his callused hands into welding gloves. On
the highway below, the school bus rolls past without stopping.
I am only seven, but I understand that it is this fact, more than any other,
that makes my family different: we don’t go to school.
Dad worries that the Government will force us to go but it can’t, because
it doesn’t know about us. Four of my parents’ seven children don’t have
birth certificates. We have no medical records because we were born at
home and have never seen a doctor or nurse.
* We have no school records
because we’ve never set foot in a classroom. When I am nine, I will be
issued a Delayed Certificate of Birth, but at this moment, according to the
state of Idaho and the federal government, I do not exist.
Of course I did exist. I had grown up preparing for the Days of
Abomination, watching for the sun to darken, for the moon to drip as if with
blood. I spent my summers bottling peaches and my winters rotating
supplies. When the World of Men failed, my family would continue on,
unaffected.
I had been educated in the rhythms of the mountain, rhythms in which
change was never fundamental, only cyclical. The same sun appeared each
morning, swept over the valley and dropped behind the peak. The snows that
fell in winter always melted in the spring. Our lives were a cycle—the cycle
of the day, the cycle of the seasons—circles of perpetual change that, when
complete, meant nothing had changed at all. I believed my family was a part
of this immortal pattern, that we were, in some sense, eternal. But eternity
belonged only to the mountain.
There’s a story my father used to tell about the peak. She was a grand old
thing, a cathedral of a mountain. The range had other mountains, taller,
more imposing, but Buck’s Peak was the most finely crafted. Its base
spanned a mile, its dark form swelling out of the earth and rising into a
flawless spire. From a distance, you could see the impression of a woman’s
body on the mountain face: her legs formed of huge ravines, her hair a spray
of pines fanning over the northern ridge. Her stance was commanding, one
leg thrust forward in a powerful movement, more stride than step.
My father called her the Indian Princess. She emerged each year when the
snows began to melt, facing south, watching the buffalo return to the valley.
Dad said the nomadic Indians had watched for her appearance as a sign of
spring, a signal the mountain was thawing, winter was over, and it was time
to come home.
All my father’s stories were about our mountain, our valley, our jagged
little patch of Idaho. He never told me what to do if I left the mountain, if I
crossed oceans and continents and found myself in strange terrain, where I
could no longer search the horizon for the Princess. He never told me how
I’d know when it was time to come home.
* Except for my sister Audrey, who broke both an arm and a leg when she was young. She was taken
to get a cast.
PART ONE
My strongest memory is not a memory. It’s something I imagined, then
came to remember as if it had happened. The memory was formed when I
was five, just before I turned six, from a story my father told in such detail
that I and my brothers and sister had each conjured our own cinematic
version, with gunfire and shouts. Mine had crickets. That’s the sound I hear
as my family huddles in the kitchen, lights off, hiding from the Feds who’ve
surrounded the house. A woman reaches for a glass of water and her
silhouette is lighted by the moon. A shot echoes like the lash of a whip and
she falls. In my memory it’s always Mother who falls, and she has a baby in
her arms.
The baby doesn’t make sense—I’m the youngest of my mother’s seven
children—but like I said, none of this happened.
—
A YEAR AFTER MY FATHER told us that story, we gathered one evening to hear
him read aloud from Isaiah, a prophecy about Immanuel. He sat on our
mustard-colored sofa, a large Bible open in his lap. Mother was next to him.
The rest of us were strewn across the shaggy brown carpet.
“Butter and honey shall he eat,” Dad droned, low and monotone, weary
from a long day hauling scrap. “That he may know to refuse the evil, and
choose the good.”
There was a heavy pause. We sat quietly.
My father was not a tall man but he was able to command a room. He had
a presence about him, the solemnity of an oracle. His hands were thick and
leathery—the hands of a man who’d been hard at work all his life—and they
grasped the Bible firmly.
He read the passage aloud a second time, then a third, then a fourth. With
each repetition the pitch of his voice climbed higher. His eyes, which
moments before had been swollen with fatigue, were now wide and alert.
There was a divine doctrine here, he said. He would inquire of the Lord.
The next morning Dad purged our fridge of milk, yogurt and cheese, and
that evening when he came home, his truck was loaded with fifty gallons of
honey.
“Isaiah doesn’t say which is evil, butter or honey,” Dad said, grinning as
my brothers lugged the white tubs to the basement. “But if you ask, the Lord
will tell you!”
When Dad read the verse to his mother, she laughed in his face. “I got
some pennies in my purse,” she said. “You better take them. They’ll be all
the sense you got.”
Grandma had a thin, angular face and an endless store of faux Indian
jewelry, all silver and turquoise, which hung in clumps from her spindly
neck and fingers. Because she lived down the hill from us, near the highway,
we called her Grandma-down-the-hill. This was to distinguish her from our
mother’s mother, who we called Grandma-over-in-town because she lived
fifteen miles south, in the only town in the county, which had a single
stoplight and a grocery store.
Dad and his mother got along like two cats with their tails tied together.
They could talk for a week and not agree about anything, but they were
tethered by their devotion to the mountain. My father’s family had been
living at the base of Buck’s Peak for half a century. Grandma’s daughters
had married and moved away, but my father stayed, building a shabby
yellow house, which he would never quite finish, just up the hill from his
mother’s, at the base of the mountain, and plunking a junkyard—one of
several—next to her manicured lawn.
They argued daily, about the mess from the junkyard but more often
about us kids. Grandma thought we should be in school and not, as she put
it, “roaming the mountain like savages.” Dad said public school was a ploy
by the Government to lead children away from God. “I may as well
surrender my kids to the devil himself,” he said, “as send them down the
road to that school.”
God told Dad to share the revelation with the people who lived and
farmed in the shadow of Buck’s Peak. On Sundays, nearly everyone
gathered at the church, a hickory-colored chapel just off the highway with
the small, restrained steeple common to Mormon churches. Dad cornered
fathers as they left their pews. He started with his cousin Jim, who listened
good-naturedly while Dad waved his Bible and explained the sinfulness of
milk. Jim grinned, then clapped Dad on the shoulder and said no righteous
God would deprive a man of homemade strawberry ice cream on a hot
summer afternoon. Jim’s wife tugged on his arm. As he slid past us I caught
a whiff of manure. Then I remembered: the big dairy farm a mile north of
Buck’s Peak, that was Jim’s.
—
AFTER DAD TOOK UP preaching against milk, Grandma jammed her fridge
full of it. She and Grandpa only drank skim but pretty soon it was all there
—two percent, whole, even chocolate. She seemed to believe this was an
important line to hold.
Breakfast became a test of loyalty. Every morning, my family sat around a
large table of reworked red oak and ate either seven-grain cereal, with honey
and molasses, or seven-grain pancakes, also with honey and molasses.
Because there were nine of us, the pancakes were never cooked all the way
through. I didn’t mind the cereal if I could soak it in milk, letting the cream
gather up the grist and seep into the pellets, but since the revelation we’d
been having it with water. It was like eating a bowl of mud.
It wasn’t long before I began to think of all that milk spoiling in
Grandma’s fridge. Then I got into the habit of skipping breakfast each
morning and going straight to the barn. I’d slop the pigs and fill the trough
for the cows and horses, then I’d hop over the corral fence, loop around the
barn and step through Grandma’s side door.
On one such morning, as I sat at the counter watching Grandma pour a
bowl of cornflakes, she said, “How would you like to go to school?”
“I wouldn’t like it,” I said.
“How do you know,” she barked. “You ain’t never tried it.”
She poured the milk and handed me the bowl, then she perched at the bar,
directly across from me, and watched as I shoveled spoonfuls into my
mouth.
“We’re leaving tomorrow for Arizona,” she told me, but I already knew.
She and Grandpa always went to Arizona when the weather began to turn.
Grandpa said he was too old for Idaho winters; the cold put an ache in his
bones. “Get yourself up real early,” Grandma said, “around five, and we’ll
take you with us. Put you in school.”
I shifted on my stool. I tried to imagine school but couldn’t. Instead I
pictured Sunday school, which I attended each week and which I hated. A
boy named Aaron had told all the girls that I couldn’t read because I didn’t
go to school, and now none of them would talk to me.
“Dad said I can go?” I said.
“No,” Grandma said. “But we’ll be long gone by the time he realizes
you’re missing.” She set my bowl in the sink and gazed out the window.
Grandma was a force of nature—impatient, aggressive, self-possessed. To
look at her was to take a step back. She dyed her hair black and this
intensified her already severe features, especially her eyebrows, which she
smeared on each morning in thick, inky arches. She drew them too large and
this made her face seem stretched. They were also drawn too high and
draped the rest of her features into an expression of boredom, almost
sarcasm.
“You should be in school,” she said.
“Won’t Dad just make you bring me back?” I said.
“Your dad can’t make me do a damned thing.” Grandma stood, squaring
herself. “If he wants you, he’ll have to come get you.” She hesitated, and for
a moment looked ashamed. “I talked to him yesterday. He won’t be able to
fetch you back for a long while. He’s behind on that shed he’s building in
town. He can’t pack up and drive to Arizona, not while the weather holds
and he and the boys can work long days.”
Grandma’s scheme was well plotted. Dad always worked from sunup until
sundown in the weeks before the first snow, trying to stockpile enough
money from hauling scrap and building barns to outlast the winter, when
jobs were scarce. Even if his mother ran off with his youngest child, he
wouldn’t be able to stop working, not until the forklift was encased in ice.
“I’ll need to feed the animals before we go,” I said. “He’ll notice I’m
gone for sure if the cows break through the fence looking for water.”
—
I DIDN’T SLEEP THAT NIGHT. I sat on the kitchen floor and watched the hours
tick by. One A.M. Two. Three.
At four I stood and put my boots by the back door. They were caked in
manure, and I was sure Grandma wouldn’t let them into her car. I pictured
them on her porch, abandoned, while I ran off shoeless to Arizona.
I imagined what would happen when my family discovered I was missing.
My brother Richard and I often spent whole days on the mountain, so it was
likely no one would notice until sundown, when Richard came home for
dinner and I didn’t. I pictured my brothers pushing out the door to search for
me. They’d try the junkyard first, hefting iron slabs in case some stray sheet
of metal had shifted and pinned me. Then they’d move outward, sweeping
the farm, crawling up trees and into the barn attic. Finally, they’d turn to the
mountain.
It would be past dusk by then—that moment just before night sets in,
when the landscape is visible only as darkness and lighter darkness, and you
feel the world around you more than you see it. I imagined my brothers
spreading over the mountain, searching the black forests. No one would talk;
everyone’s thoughts would be the same. Things could go horribly wrong on
the mountain. Cliffs appeared suddenly. Feral horses, belonging to my
grandfather, ran wild over thick banks of water hemlock, and there were
more than a few rattlesnakes. We’d done this search before when a calf went
missing from the barn. In the valley you’d find an injured animal; on the
mountain, a dead one.
I imagined Mother standing by the back door, her eyes sweeping the dark
ridge, when my father came home to tell her they hadn’t found me. My
sister, Audrey, would suggest that someone ask Grandma, and Mother would
say Grandma had left that morning for Arizona. Those words would hang in
the air for a moment, then everyone would know where I’d gone. I imagined
my father’s face, his dark eyes shrinking, his mouth clamping into a frown
as he turned to my mother. “You think she chose to go?”
Low and sorrowful, his voice echoed. Then it was drowned out by sounds
from another conjured remembrance—crickets, then gunfire, then silence.
—
THE EVENT WAS A FAMOUS ONE, I would later learn—like Wounded Knee or
Waco—but when my father first told us the story, it felt like no one in the
world knew about it except us.
It began near the end of canning season, which other kids probably called
“summer.” My family always spent the warm months bottling fruit for
storage, which Dad said we’d need in the Days of Abomination. One
evening, Dad was uneasy when he came in from the junkyard. He paced the
kitchen during dinner, hardly touching a bite. We had to get everything in
order, he said. There was little time.
We spent the next day boiling and skinning peaches. By sundown we’d
filled dozens of Mason jars, which were set out in perfect rows, still warm
from the pressure cooker. Dad surveyed our work, counting the jars and
muttering to himself, then he turned to Mother and said, “It’s not enough.”
That night Dad called a family meeting, and we gathered around the
kitchen table, because it was wide and long, and could seat all of us. We had
a right to know what we were up against, he said. He was standing at the
head of the table; the rest of us perched on benches, studying the thick
planks of red oak.
“There’s a family not far from here,” Dad said. “They’re freedom fighters.
They wouldn’t let the Government brainwash their kids in them public
schools, so the Feds came after them.” Dad exhaled, long and slow. “The
Feds surrounded the family’s cabin, kept them locked in there for weeks,
and when a hungry child, a little boy, snuck out to go hunting, the Feds shot
him dead.”
I scanned my brothers. I’d never seen fear on Luke’s face before.
“They’re still in the cabin,” Dad said. “They keep the lights off, and they
crawl on the floor, away from the doors and windows. I don’t know how
much food they got. Might be they’ll starve before the Feds give up.”
No one spoke. Eventually Luke, who was twelve, asked if we could help.
“No,” Dad said. “Nobody can. They’re trapped in their own home. But they
got their guns, you can bet that’s why the Feds ain’t charged in.” He paused
to sit, folding himself onto the low bench in slow, stiff movements. He
looked old to my eyes, worn out. “We can’t help them, but we can help
ourselves. When the Feds come to Buck’s Peak, we’ll be ready.”
That night, Dad dragged a pile of old army bags up from the basement.
He said they were our “head for the hills” bags. We spent that night packing
them with supplies—herbal medicines, water purifiers, flint and steel. Dad
had bought several boxes of military MREs—Meals Ready-to-Eat—and we
put as many as we could fit into our packs, imagining the moment when,
having fled the house and hiding ourselves in the wild plum trees near the
creek, we’d eat them. Some of my brothers stowed guns in their packs but I
had only a small knife, and even so my pack was as big as me by the time
we’d finished. I asked Luke to hoist it onto a shelf in my closet, but Dad told
me to keep it low, where I could fetch it quick, so I slept with it in my bed.
I practiced slipping the bag onto my back and running with it—I didn’t
want to be left behind. I imagined our escape, a midnight flight to the safety
of the Princess. The mountain, I understood, was our ally. To those who
knew her she could be kind, but to intruders she was pure treachery, and
this would give us an advantage. Then again, if we were going to take cover
on the mountain when the Feds came, I didn’t understand why we were
canning all these peaches. We couldn’t haul a thousand heavy Mason jars up
the peak. Or did we need the peaches so we could bunker down in the
house, like the Weavers, and fight it out?
Fighting it out seemed likely, especially a few days later when Dad came
home with more than a dozen military-surplus rifles, mostly SKSs, their
thin silver bayonets folded neatly under their barrels. The guns arrived in
narrow tin boxes and were packed in Cosmoline, a brownish substance the
consistency of lard that had to be stripped away. After they’d been cleaned,
my brother Tyler chose one and set it on a sheet of black plastic, which he
folded over the rifle, sealing it with yards of silvery duct tape. Hoisting the
bundle onto his shoulder, he carried it down the hill and dropped it next to
the red railroad car. Then he began to dig. When the hole was wide and
deep, he dropped the rifle into it, and I watched him cover it with dirt, his
muscles swelling from the exertion, his jaw clenched.
Soon after, Dad bought a machine to manufacture bullets from spent
cartridges. Now we could last longer in a standoff, he said. I thought of my
“head for the hills” bag, waiting in my bed, and of the rifle hidden near the
railcar, and began to worry about the bullet-making machine. It was bulky
and bolted to an iron workstation in the basement. If we were taken by
surprise, I figured we wouldn’t have time to fetch it. I wondered if we should
bury it, too, with the rifle.
We kept on bottling peaches. I don’t remember how many days passed or
how many jars we’d added to our stores before Dad told us more of the
story.
“Randy Weaver’s been shot,” Dad said, his voice thin and erratic. “He left
the cabin to fetch his son’s body, and the Feds shot him.” I’d never seen my
father cry, but now tears were dripping in a steady stream from his nose. He
didn’t wipe them, just let them spill onto his shirt. “His wife heard the shot
and ran to the window, holding their baby. Then came the second shot.”
Mother was sitting with her arms folded, one hand across her chest, the
other clamped over her mouth. I stared at our speckled linoleum while Dad
told us how the baby had been lifted from its mother’s arms, its face
smeared with her blood.
Until that moment, some part of me had wanted the Feds to come, had
craved the adventure. Now I felt real fear. I pictured my brothers crouching
in the dark, their sweaty hands slipping down their rifles. I pictured Mother,
tired and parched, drawing back away from the window. I pictured myself
lying flat on the floor, still and silent, listening to the sharp chirp of crickets
in the field. Then I saw Mother stand and reach for the kitchen tap. A white
flash, the roar of gunfire, and she fell. I leapt to catch the baby.
Dad never told us the end of the story. We didn’t have a TV or radio, so
perhaps he never learned how it ended himself. The last thing I remember
him saying about it was, “Next time, it could be us.”
Those words would stay with me. I would hear their echo in the chirp of
crickets, in the squish of peaches dropping into a glass jar, in the metallic
chink of an SKS being cleaned. I would hear them every morning when I
passed the railroad car and paused over the chickweed and bull thistle
growing where Tyler had buried the rifle. Long after Dad had forgotten
about the revelation in Isaiah, and Mother was again hefting plastic jugs of
“Western Family 2%” into the fridge, I would remember the Weavers.
—
IT WAS ALMOST FIVE A.M.
I returned to my room, my head full of crickets and gunfire. In the lower
bunk, Audrey was snoring, a low, contented hum that invited me to do the
same. Instead I climbed up to my bed, crossed my legs and looked out the
window. Five passed. Then six. At seven, Grandma appeared and I watched
her pace up and down her patio, turning every few moments to gaze up the
hill at our house. Then she and Grandpa stepped into their car and pulled
onto the highway.
When the car was gone, I got out of bed and ate a bowl of bran with
water. Outside I was greeted by Luke’s goat, Kamikaze, who nibbled my
shirt as I walked to the barn. I passed the go-kart Richard was building from
an old lawnmower. I slopped the pigs, filled the trough and moved
Grandpa’s horses to a new pasture.
After I’d finished I climbed the railway car and looked out over the valley.
It was easy to pretend the car was moving, speeding away, that any moment
the valley might disappear behind me. I’d spent hours playing that fantasy
through in my head but today the reel wouldn’t take. I turned west, away
from the fields, and faced the peak.
The Princess was always brightest in spring, just after the conifers
emerged from the snow, their deep green needles seeming almost black
against the tawny browns of soil and bark. It was autumn now. I could still
see her but she was fading: the reds and yellows of a dying summer
obscured her dark form. Soon it would snow. In the valley that first snow
would melt but on the mountain it would linger, burying the Princess until
spring, when she would reappear, watchful.
“Do you have calendula?” the midwife said. “I also need lobelia and
witch hazel.”
She was sitting at the kitchen counter, watching Mother rummage through
our birchwood cabinets. An electric scale sat on the counter between them,
and occasionally Mother would use it to weigh dried leaves. It was spring.
There was a morning chill despite the bright sunlight.
“I made a fresh batch of calendula last week,” Mother said. “Tara, run
and fetch it.”
I retrieved the tincture, and my mother packed it in a plastic grocery bag
with the dried herbs. “Anything else?” Mother laughed. The pitch was high,
nervous. The midwife intimidated her, and when intimidated my mother
took on a weightless quality, whisking about every time the midwife made
one of her slow, solid movements.
The midwife surveyed her list. “That will do.”
She was a short, plump woman in her late forties, with eleven children
and a russet-colored wart on her chin. She had the longest hair I’d ever seen,
a cascade the color of field mice that fell to her knees when she took it out
of its tight bun. Her features were heavy, her voice thick with authority. She
had no license, no certificates. She was a midwife entirely by the power of
her own say-so, which was more than enough.
Mother was to be her assistant. I remember watching them that first day,
comparing them. Mother with her rose-petal skin and her hair curled into
soft waves that bounced about her shoulders. Her eyelids shimmered.
Mother did her makeup every morning, but if she didn’t have time she’d
apologize all day, as if by not doing it, she had inconvenienced everyone.
The midwife looked as though she hadn’t given a thought to her
appearance in a decade, and the way she carried herself made you feel
foolish for having noticed.
The midwife nodded goodbye, her arms full of Mother’s herbs.
The next time the midwife came she brought her daughter Maria, who
stood next to her mother, imitating her movements, with a baby wedged
against her wiry nine-year-old frame. I stared hopefully at her. I hadn’t met
many other girls like me, who didn’t go to school. I edged closer, trying to
draw her attention, but she was wholly absorbed in listening to her mother,
who was explaining how cramp bark and motherwort should be
administered to treat post-birth contractions. Maria’s head bobbed in
agreement; her eyes never left her mother’s face.
I trudged down the hall to my room, alone, but when I turned to shut the
door she was standing in it, still toting the baby on her hip. He was a meaty
box of flesh, and her torso bent sharply at the waist to offset his bulk.
“Are you going?” she said.
I didn’t understand the question.
“I always go,” she said. “Have you seen a baby get born?”
“No.”
“I have, lots of times. Do you know what it means when a baby comes
breech?”
“No.” I said it like an apology.
—
THE FIRST TIME MOTHER assisted with a birth she was gone for two days.
Then she wafted through the back door, so pale she seemed translucent, and
drifted to the couch, where she stayed, trembling. “It was awful,” she
whispered. “Even Judy said she was scared.” Mother closed her eyes. “She
didn’t look scared.”
Mother rested for several minutes, until she regained some color, then she
told the story. The labor had been long, grueling, and when the baby finally
came the mother had torn, and badly. There was blood everywhere. The
hemorrhage wouldn’t stop. That’s when Mother realized the umbilical cord
had wrapped around the baby’s throat. He was purple, so still Mother
thought he was dead. As Mother recounted these details, the blood drained
from her face until she sat, pale as an egg, her arms wrapped around herself.
Audrey made chamomile tea and we put our mother to bed. When Dad
came home that night, Mother told him the same story. “I can’t do it,” she
said. “Judy can, but I can’t.” Dad put an arm on her shoulder. “This is a
calling from the Lord,” he said. “And sometimes the Lord asks for hard
things.”
Mother didn’t want to be a midwife. Midwifery had been Dad’s idea, one
of his schemes for self-reliance. There was nothing he hated more than our
being dependent on the Government. Dad said one day we would be
completely off the grid. As soon as he could get the money together, he
planned to build a pipeline to bring water down from the mountain, and
after that he’d install solar panels all over the farm. That way we’d have
water and electricity in the End of Days, when everyone else was drinking
from puddles and living in darkness. Mother was an herbalist so she could
tend our health, and if she learned to midwife she would be able to deliver
the grandchildren when they came along.
The midwife came to visit Mother a few days after the first birth. She
brought Maria, who again followed me to my room. “It’s too bad your
mother got a bad one her first time,” she said, smiling. “The next one will be
easier.”
A few weeks later, this prediction was tested. It was midnight. Because
we didn’t have a phone, the midwife called Grandma-down-the-hill, who
walked up the hill, tired and ornery, and barked that it was time for Mother
to go “play doctor.” She stayed only minutes but woke the whole house.
“Why you people can’t just go to a hospital like everyone else is beyond
me,” she shouted, slamming the door on her way out.
Mother retrieved her overnight bag and the tackle box she’d filled with
dark bottles of tincture, then she walked slowly out the door. I was anxious
and slept badly, but when Mother came home the next morning, hair
deranged and dark circles under her eyes, her lips were parted in a wide
smile. “It was a girl,” she said. Then she went to bed and slept all day.
Months passed in this way, Mother leaving the house at all hours and
coming home, trembling, relieved to her core that it was over. By the time
the leaves started to fall she’d helped with a dozen births. By the end of
winter, several dozen. In the spring she told my father she’d had enough,
that she could deliver a baby if she had to, if it was the End of the World.
Now she could stop.
Dad’s face sank when she said this. He reminded her that this was God’s
will, that it would bless our family. “You need to be a midwife,” he said.
“You need to deliver a baby on your own.”
Mother shook her head. “I can’t,” she said. “Besides, who would hire me
when they could hire Judy?”
She’d jinxed herself, thrown her gauntlet before God. Soon after, Maria
told me her father had a new job in Wyoming. “Mom says your mother
should take over,” Maria said. A thrilling image took shape in my
imagination, of me in Maria’s role, the midwife’s daughter, confident,
knowledgeable. But when I turned to look at my mother standing next to
me, the image turned to vapor.
Midwifery was not illegal in the state of Idaho, but it had not yet been
sanctioned. If a delivery went wrong, a midwife might face charges for
practicing medicine without a license; if things went very wrong, she could
face criminal charges for manslaughter, even prison time. Few women
would take such a risk, so midwives were scarce: on the day Judy left for
Wyoming, Mother became the only midwife for a hundred miles.
Women with swollen bellies began coming to the house and begging
Mother to deliver their babies. Mother crumpled at the thought. One woman
sat on the edge of our faded yellow sofa, her eyes cast downward, as she
explained that her husband was out of work and they didn’t have money for
a hospital. Mother sat quietly, eyes focused, lips tight, her whole expression
momentarily solid. Then the expression dissolved and she said, in her small
voice, “I’m not a midwife, just an assistant.”
The woman returned several times, perching on our sofa again and again,
describing the uncomplicated births of her other children. Whenever Dad
saw the woman’s car from the junkyard, he’d often come into the house,
quietly, through the back door, on the pretense of getting water; then he’d
stand in the kitchen taking slow, silent sips, his ear bent toward the living
room. Each time the woman left Dad could hardly contain his excitement,
so that finally, succumbing to either the woman’s desperation or to Dad’s
elation, or to both, Mother gave way.
The birth went smoothly. Then the woman had a friend who was also
pregnant, and Mother delivered her baby as well. Then that woman had a
friend. Mother took on an assistant. Before long she was delivering so many
babies that Audrey and I spent our days driving around the valley with her,
watching her conduct prenatal exams and prescribe herbs. She became our
teacher in a way that, because we rarely held school at home, she’d never
been before. She explained every remedy and palliative. If So-and-so’s
blood pressure was high, she should be given hawthorn to stabilize the
collagen and dilate the coronary blood vessels. If Mrs. Someone-or-other
was having premature contractions, she needed a bath in ginger to increase
the supply of oxygen to the uterus.
Midwifing changed my mother. She was a grown woman with seven
children, but this was the first time in her life that she was, without question
or caveat, the one in charge. Sometimes, in the days after a birth, I detected
in her something of Judy’s heavy presence, in a forceful turn of her head, or
the imperious arch of an eyebrow. She stopped wearing makeup, then she
stopped apologizing for not wearing it.
Mother charged about five hundred dollars for a delivery, and this was
another way midwifing changed her: suddenly she had money. Dad didn’t
believe that women should work, but I suppose he thought it was all right
for Mother to be paid for midwifing, because it undermined the
Government. Also, we needed the money. Dad worked harder than any man
I knew, but scrapping and building barns and hay sheds didn’t bring in
much, and it helped that Mother could buy groceries with the envelopes of
small bills she kept in her purse. Sometimes, if we’d spent the whole day
flying about the valley, delivering herbs and doing prenatal exams, Mother
would use that money to take me and Audrey out to eat. Grandma-over-in-
town had given me a journal, pink with a caramel-colored teddy bear on the
cover, and in it I recorded the first time Mother took us to a restaurant,
which I described as “real fancy with menus and everything.” According to
the entry, my meal came to $3.30.
Mother also used the money to improve herself as a midwife. She bought
an oxygen tank in case a baby came out and couldn’t breathe, and she took a
suturing class so she could stitch the women who tore. Judy had always sent
women to the hospital for stitches, but Mother was determined to learn. Self reliance, I imagine her thinking.
With the rest of the money, Mother put in a phone line.
* One day a white
van appeared, and a handful of men in dark overalls began climbing over the
utility poles by the highway. Dad burst through the back door demanding to
know what the hell was going on. “I thought you wanted a phone,” Mother
said, her eyes so full of surprise they were irreproachable. She went on,
talking fast. “You said there could be trouble if someone goes into labor and
Grandma isn’t home to take the call. I thought, He’s right, we need a phone!
Silly me! Did I misunderstand?”
Dad stood there for several seconds, his mouth open. Of course a midwife
needs a phone, he said. Then he went back to the junkyard and that’s all that
was ever said about it. We hadn’t had a telephone for as long as I could
remember, but the next day there it was, resting in a lime-green cradle, its
glossy finish looking out of place next to the murky jars of cohosh and
skullcap.
—
LUKE WAS FIFTEEN WHEN he asked Mother if he could have a birth certificate.
He wanted to enroll in Driver’s Ed because Tony, our oldest brother, was
making good money driving rigs hauling gravel, which he could do because
he had a license. Shawn and Tyler, the next oldest after Tony, had birth
certificates; it was only the youngest four—Luke, Audrey, Richard and me—
who didn’t.
Mother began to file the paperwork. I don’t know if she talked it over
with Dad first. If she did, I can’t explain what changed his mind—why
suddenly a ten-year policy of not registering with the Government ended
without a struggle—but I think maybe it was that telephone. It was almost
as if my father had come to accept that if he were really going to do battle
with the Government, he would have to take certain risks. Mother’s being a
midwife would subvert the Medical Establishment, but in order to be a
midwife she needed a phone. Perhaps the same logic was extended to Luke:
Luke would need income to support a family, to buy supplies and prepare
for the End of Days, so he needed a birth certificate. The other possibility is
that Mother didn’t ask Dad. Perhaps she just decided, on her own, and he
accepted her decision. Perhaps even he—charismatic gale of a man that he
was—was temporarily swept aside by the force of her.
Once she had begun the paperwork for Luke, Mother decided she might
as well get birth certificates for all of us. It was harder than she expected.
She tore the house apart looking for documents to prove we were her
children. She found nothing. In my case, no one was sure when I’d been
born. Mother remembered one date, Dad another, and Grandma-down-the hill, who went to town and swore an affidavit that I was her granddaughter,
gave a third date.
Mother called the church headquarters in Salt Lake City. A clerk there
found a certificate from my christening, when I was a baby, and another
from my baptism, which, as with all Mormon children, had occurred when I
was eight. Mother requested copies. They arrived in the mail a few days
later. “For Pete’s sake!” Mother said when she opened the envelope. Each
document gave a different birth date, and neither matched the one Grandma
had put on the affidavit.
That week Mother was on the phone for hours every day. With the
receiver wedged against her shoulder, the cord stretched across the kitchen,
she cooked, cleaned, and strained tinctures of goldenseal and blessed thistle,
while having the same conversation over and over.
“Obviously I should have registered her when she was born, but I didn’t.
So here we are.”
Voices murmured on the other end of the line.
“I’ve already told you—and your subordinate, and your subordinate’s
subordinate, and fifty other people this week—she doesn’t have school or
medical records. She doesn’t have them! They weren’t lost. I can’t ask for
copies. They don’t exist!”
“Her birthday? Let’s say the twenty-seventh.”
“No, I’m not sure.”
“No, I don’t have documentation.”
“Yes, I’ll hold.”
The voices always put Mother on hold when she admitted that she didn’t
know my birthday, passing her up the line to their superiors, as if not
knowing what day I was born delegitimized the entire notion of my having
an identity. You can’t be a person without a birthday, they seemed to say. I
didn’t understand why not. Until Mother decided to get my birth certificate,
not knowing my birthday had never seemed strange. I knew I’d been born
near the end of September, and each year I picked a day, one that didn’t fall
on a Sunday because it’s no fun spending your birthday in church.
Sometimes I wished Mother would give me the phone so I could explain. “I
have a birthday, same as you,” I wanted to tell the voices. “It just changes.
Don’t you wish you could change your birthday?”
Eventually, Mother persuaded Grandma-down-the-hill to swear a new
affidavit claiming I’d been born on the twenty-seventh, even though
Grandma still believed it was the twenty-ninth, and the state of Idaho issued
a Delayed Certificate of Birth. I remember the day it came in the mail. It felt
oddly dispossessing, being handed this first legal proof of my personhood:
until that moment, it had never occurred to me that proof was required.
In the end, I got my birth certificate long before Luke got his. When
Mother had told the voices on the phone that she thought I’d been born
sometime in the last week of September, they’d been silent. But when she
told them she wasn’t exactly sure whether Luke had been born in May or
June, that set the voices positively buzzing.
—
THAT FALL, WHEN I was nine, I went with Mother on a birth. I’d been asking
to go for months, reminding her that Maria had seen a dozen births by the
time she was my age. “I’m not a nursing mother,” she said. “I have no
reason to take you. Besides, you wouldn’t like it.”
Eventually, Mother was hired by a woman who had several small
children. It was arranged; I would tend them during the birth.
The call came in the middle of the night. The mechanical ring drilled its
way down the hall, and I held my breath, hoping it wasn’t a wrong number.
A minute later Mother was at my bedside. “It’s time,” she said, and together
we ran to the car.
For ten miles Mother rehearsed with me what I was to say if the worst
happened and the Feds came. Under no circumstances was I to tell them that
my mother was a midwife. If they asked why we were there, I was to say
nothing. Mother called it “the art of shutting up.” “You just keep saying you
were asleep and you didn’t see anything and you don’t know anything and
you can’t remember why we’re here,” she said. “Don’t give them any more
rope to hang me with than they already have.”
Mother fell into silence. I studied her as she drove. Her face was
illuminated by the lights in the dashboard, and it appeared ghostly white set
against the utter blackness of country roads. Fear was etched into her
features, in the bunching of her forehead and the tightening of her lips.
Alone with just me, she put aside the persona she displayed for others. She
was her old self again, fragile, breathy.
I heard soft whispers and realized they were coming from her. She was
chanting what-ifs to herself. What if something went wrong? What if there
was a medical history they hadn’t told her about, some complication? Or
what if it was something ordinary, a common crisis, and she panicked, froze,
failed to stop the hemorrhage in time? In a few minutes we would be there,
and she would have two lives in her small, trembling hands. Until that
moment, I’d never understood the risk she was taking. “People die in
hospitals,” she whispered, her fingers clenching the wheel, wraithlike.
“Sometimes God calls them home, and there’s nothing anyone can do. But if
it happens to a midwife—” She turned, speaking directly to me. “All it takes
is one mistake, and you’ll be visiting me in prison.”
We arrived and Mother transformed. She issued a string of commands, to
the father, to the mother, and to me. I almost forgot to do what she asked, I
couldn’t take my eyes off her. I realize now that that night I was seeing her
for the first time, the secret strength of her.
She barked orders and we moved wordlessly to follow them. The baby
was born without complications. It was mythic and romantic, being an
intimate witness to this turn in life’s cycle, but Mother had been right, I
didn’t like it. It was long and exhausting, and smelled of groin sweat.
I didn’t ask to go on the next birth. Mother returned home pale and
shaking. Her voice quivered as she told me and my sister the story: how the
unborn baby’s heart rate had dropped dangerously low, to a mere tremor;
how she’d called an ambulance, then decided they couldn’t wait and taken
the mother in her own car. She’d driven at such speed that by the time she
made it to the hospital, she’d acquired a police escort. In the ER, she’d tried
to give the doctors the information they needed without seeming too
knowledgeable, without making them suspect that she was an unlicensed
midwife.
An emergency cesarean was performed. The mother and baby remained
in the hospital for several days, and by the time they were released Mother
had stopped trembling. In fact, she seemed exhilarated and had begun to tell
the story differently, relishing the moment she’d been pulled over by the
policeman, who was surprised to find a moaning woman, obviously in labor,
in the backseat. “I slipped into the scatterbrained-woman routine,” she told
me and Audrey, her voice growing louder, catching hold. “Men like to think
they’re saving some brain-dead woman who’s got herself into a scrape. All I
had to do was step aside and let him play the hero!”
The most dangerous moment for Mother had come minutes later, in the
hospital, after the woman had been wheeled away. A doctor stopped Mother
and asked why she’d been at the birth in the first place. She smiled at the
memory. “I asked him the dumbest questions I could think of.” She put on a
high, coquettish voice very unlike her own. “Oh! Was that the baby’s head?
Aren’t babies supposed to come out feet-first?” The doctor was persuaded
that she couldn’t possibly be a midwife.
—
THERE WERE NO HERBALISTS in Wyoming as good as Mother, so a few months
after the incident at the hospital, Judy came to Buck’s Peak to restock. The
two women chatted in the kitchen, Judy perched on a barstool, Mother
leaning across the counter, her head resting lazily in her hand. I took the list
of herbs to the storeroom. Maria, lugging a different baby, followed. I pulled
dried leaves and clouded liquids from the shelves, all the while gushing
about Mother’s exploits, finishing with the confrontation in the hospital.
Maria had her own stories about dodging Feds, but when she began to tell
one I interrupted her.
“Judy is a fine midwife,” I said, my chest rising. “But when it comes to
doctors and cops, nobody plays stupid like my mother.”
* While everyone agrees that there were many years in which my parents did not have a phone, there
is considerable disagreement in the family about which years they were. I’ve asked my brothers,
aunts, uncles and cousins, but I have not been able to definitively establish a timeline, and have
therefore relied on my own memories.
My mother, Faye, was a mailman’s daughter. She grew up in town, in a
yellow house with a white picket fence lined with purple irises. Her mother
was a seamstress, the best in the valley some said, so as a young woman
Faye wore beautiful clothes, all perfectly tailored, from velvet jackets and
polyester trousers to woolen pantsuits and gabardine dresses. She attended
church and participated in school and community activities. Her life had an
air of intense order, normalcy, and unassailable respectability.
That air of respectability was carefully concocted by her mother. My
grandmother, LaRue, had come of age in the 1950s, in the decade of
idealistic fever that burned after World War II. LaRue’s father was an
alcoholic in a time before the language of addiction and empathy had been
invented, when alcoholics weren’t called alcoholics, they were called
drunks. She was from the “wrong kind” of family but embedded in a pious
Mormon community that, like many communities, visited the crimes of the
parents on the children. She was deemed unmarriageable by the respectable
men in town. When she met and married my grandfather—a good-natured
young man just out of the navy—she dedicated herself to constructing the
perfect family, or at least the appearance of it. This would, she believed,
shield her daughters from the social contempt that had so wounded her.
One result of this was the white picket fence and the closet of handmade
clothes. Another was that her eldest daughter married a severe young man
with jet-black hair and an appetite for unconventionality.
That is to say, my mother responded willfully to the respectability heaped
upon her. Grandma wanted to give her daughter the gift she herself had
never had, the gift of coming from a good family. But Faye didn’t want it.
My mother was not a social revolutionary—even at the peak of her rebellion
she preserved her Mormon faith, with its devotion to marriage and
motherhood—but the social upheavals of the 1970s did seem to have at least
one effect on her: she didn’t want the white picket fence and gabardine
dresses.
My mother told me dozens of stories of her childhood, of Grandma
fretting about her oldest daughter’s social standing, about whether her piqué
dress was the proper cut, or her velvet slacks the correct shade of blue.
These stories nearly always ended with my father swooping in and trading
out the velvet for blue jeans. One telling in particular has stayed with me. I
am seven or eight and am in my room dressing for church. I have taken a
damp rag to my face, hands and feet, scrubbing only the skin that will be
visible. Mother watches me pass a cotton dress over my head, which I have
chosen for its long sleeves so I won’t have to wash my arms, and a jealousy
lights her eyes.
“If you were Grandma’s daughter,” she says, “we’d have been up at the
crack of dawn preening your hair. Then the rest of the morning would be
spent agonizing over which shoes, the white or the cream, would give the
right impression.”
Mother’s face twists into an ugly smile. She’s grasping for humor but the
memory is jaundiced. “Even after we finally chose the cream, we’d be late,
because at the last minute Grandma would panic and drive to Cousin
Donna’s to borrow her cream shoes, which had a lower heel.”
Mother stares out the window. She has retreated into herself.
“White or cream?” I say. “Aren’t they the same color?” I owned only one
pair of church shoes. They were black, or at least they’d been black when
they belonged to my sister.
With the dress on, I turn to the mirror and sand away the crusty dirt
around my neckline, thinking how lucky Mother is to have escaped a world
in which there was an important difference between white and cream, and
where such questions might consume a perfectly good morning, a morning
that might otherwise be spent plundering Dad’s junkyard with Luke’s goat.
—
MY FATHER, GENE, WAS one of those young men who somehow manage to
seem both solemn and mischievous. His physical appearance was striking—
ebony hair, a strict, angular face, nose like an arrow pointing toward fierce,
deep-set eyes. His lips were often pressed together in a jocular grin, as if all
the world were his to laugh at.
Although I passed my childhood on the same mountain that my father
had passed his, slopping pigs in the same iron trough, I know very little
about his boyhood. He never talked about it, so all I have to go on are hints
from my mother, who told me that, in his younger years, Grandpa-down-the hill had been violent, with a hair-trigger temper. Mother’s use of the words
“had been” always struck me as funny. We all knew better than to cross
Grandpa. He had a short fuse, that was just fact and anybody in the valley
could have told you as much. He was weatherworn inside and out, as taut
and rugged as the horses he ran wild on the mountain.
Dad’s mother worked for the Farm Bureau in town. As an adult, Dad
would develop fierce opinions about women working, radical even for our
rural Mormon community. “A woman’s place is in the home,” he would say
every time he saw a married woman working in town. Now I’m older, I
sometimes wonder if Dad’s fervor had more to do with his own mother than
with doctrine. I wonder if he just wished that she had been home, so he
wouldn’t have been left for all those long hours with Grandpa’s temper.
Running the farm consumed Dad’s childhood. I doubt he expected to go
to college. Still, the way Mother tells it, back then Dad was bursting with
energy, laughter and panache. He drove a baby-blue Volkswagen Beetle,
wore outlandish suits cut from colorful fabrics, and showcased a thick,
fashionable mustache.
They met in town. Faye was waitressing at the bowling alley one Friday
night when Gene wandered in with a pack of his friends. She’d never seen
him before, so she knew immediately that he wasn’t from town and must
have come from the mountains surrounding the valley. Farm life had made
Gene different from other young men: he was serious for his age, more
physically impressive and independent-minded.
There’s a sense of sovereignty that comes from life on a mountain, a
perception of privacy and isolation, even of dominion. In that vast space you
can sail unaccompanied for hours, afloat on pine and brush and rock. It’s a
tranquillity born of sheer immensity; it calms with its very magnitude,
which renders the merely human of no consequence. Gene was formed by
this alpine hypnosis, this hushing of human drama.
In the valley, Faye tried to stop her ears against the constant gossip of a
small town, whose opinions pushed in through the windows and crept under
the doors. Mother often described herself as a pleaser: she said she couldn’t
stop herself from speculating what people wanted her to be, and from
contorting herself, compulsively, unwillingly, into whatever it was. Living in
her respectable house in the center of town, crowded by four other houses,
each so near anyone could peer through the windows and whisper a
judgment, Faye felt trapped.
I’ve often imagined the moment when Gene took Faye to the top of
Buck’s Peak and she was, for the first time, unable to see the faces or hear
the voices of the people in the town below. They were far away. Dwarfed by
the mountain, hushed by the wind.
They were engaged soon after.
—
MOTHER USED TO TELL a story from the time before she was married. She had
been close to her brother Lynn, so she took him to meet the man she hoped
would be her husband. It was summer, dusk, and Dad’s cousins were
roughhousing the way they did after a harvest. Lynn arrived and, seeing a
room of bowlegged ruffians shouting at each other, fists clenched, swiping at
the air, thought he was witnessing a brawl straight out of a John Wayne film.
He wanted to call the police.
“I told him to listen,” Mother would say, tears in her eyes from laughing.
She always told this story the same way, and it was such a favorite that if she
departed in any way from the usual script, we’d tell it for her. “I told him to
pay attention to the actual words they were shouting. Everyone sounded mad
as hornets, but really they were having a lovely conversation. You had to
listen to what they were saying, not how they were saying it. I told him,
That’s just how Westovers talk!”
By the time she’d finished we were usually on the floor. We’d cackle until
our ribs hurt, imagining our prim, professorial uncle meeting Dad’s unruly
crew. Lynn found the scene so distasteful he never went back, and in my
whole life I never saw him on the mountain. Served him right, we thought,
for his meddling, for trying to draw Mother back into that world of
gabardine dresses and cream shoes. We understood that the dissolution of
Mother’s family was the inauguration of ours. The two could not exist
together. Only one could have her.
Mother never told us that her family had opposed the engagement but we
knew. There were traces the decades hadn’t erased. My father seldom set
foot in Grandma-over-in-town’s house, and when he did he was sullen and
stared at the door. As a child I scarcely knew my aunts, uncles or cousins on
my mother’s side. We rarely visited them—I didn’t even know where most
of them lived—and it was even rarer for them to visit the mountain. The
exception was my aunt Angie, my mother’s youngest sister, who lived in
town and insisted on seeing my mother.
What I know about the engagement has come to me in bits and pieces,
mostly from the stories Mother told. I know she had the ring before Dad
served a mission—which was expected of all faithful Mormon men—and
spent two years proselytizing in Florida. Lynn took advantage of this
absence to introduce his sister to every marriageable man he could find this
side of the Rockies, but none could make her forget the stern farm boy who
ruled over his own mountain.
Gene returned from Florida and they were married.
LaRue sewed the wedding dress.
—
I’VE ONLY SEEN A single photograph from the wedding. It’s of my parents
posing in front of a gossamer curtain of pale ivory. Mother is wearing a
traditional dress of beaded silk and venetian lace, with a neckline that sits
above her collarbone. An embroidered veil covers her head. My father wears
a cream suit with wide black lapels. They are both intoxicated with
happiness, Mother with a relaxed smile, Dad with a grin so large it pokes
out from under the corners of his mustache.
It is difficult for me to believe that the untroubled young man in that
photograph is my father. Fearful and anxious, he comes into focus for me as
a weary middle-aged man stockpiling food and ammunition.
I don’t know when the man in that photograph became the man I know as
my father. Perhaps there was no single moment. Dad married when he was
twenty-one, had his first son, my brother Tony, at twenty-two. When he was
twenty-four, Dad asked Mother if they could hire an herbalist to midwife my
brother Shawn. She agreed. Was that the first hint, or was it just Gene being
Gene, eccentric and unconventional, trying to shock his disapproving in laws? After all, when Tyler was born twenty months later, the birth took
place in a hospital. When Dad was twenty-seven, Luke was born, at home,
delivered by a midwife. Dad decided not to file for a birth certificate, a
decision he repeated with Audrey, Richard and me. A few years later,
around the time he turned thirty, Dad pulled my brothers out of school. I
don’t remember it, because it was before I was born, but I wonder if perhaps
that was a turning point. In the four years that followed, Dad got rid of the
telephone and chose not to renew his license to drive. He stopped registering
and insuring the family car. Then he began to hoard food.
This last part sounds like my father, but it is not the father my older
brothers remember. Dad had just turned forty when the Feds laid siege to
the Weavers, an event that confirmed his worst fears. After that he was at
war, even if the war was only in his head. Perhaps that is why Tony looks at
that photo and sees his father, and I see a stranger.
Fourteen years after the incident with the Weavers, I would sit in a
university classroom and listen to a professor of psychology describe
something called bipolar disorder. Until that moment I had never heard of
mental illness. I knew people could go crazy—they’d wear dead cats on
their heads or fall in love with a turnip—but the notion that a person could
be functional, lucid, persuasive, and something could still be wrong, had
never occurred to me.
The professor recited facts in a dull, earthy voice: the average age of onset
is twenty-five; there may be no symptoms before then.
The irony was that if Dad was bipolar—or had any of a dozen disorders
that might explain his behavior—the same paranoia that was a symptom of
the illness would prevent its ever being diagnosed and treated. No one would
ever know.
—
GRANDMA-OVER-IN-TOWN DIED THREE YEARS ago, age eighty-six.
I didn’t know her well.
All those years I was passing in and out of her kitchen, and she never told
me what it had been like for her, watching her daughter shut herself away,
walled in by phantoms and paranoias.
When I picture her now I conjure a single image, as if my memory is a
slide projector and the tray is stuck. She’s sitting on a cushioned bench. Her
hair pushes out of her head in tight curls, and her lips are pulled into a polite
smile, which is welded in place. Her eyes are pleasant but unoccupied, as if
she’s observing a staged drama.
That smile haunts me. It was constant, the only eternal thing, inscrutable,
detached, dispassionate. Now that I’m older and I’ve taken the trouble to get
to know her, mostly through my aunts and uncles, I know she was none of
those things.
I attended the memorial. It was open casket and I found myself searching
her face. The embalmers hadn’t gotten her lips right—the gracious smile
she’d worn like an iron mask had been stripped away. It was the first time I’d
seen her without it and that’s when it finally occurred to me: that Grandma
was the only person who might have understood what was happening to me.
How the paranoia and fundamentalism were carving up my life, how they
were taking from me the people I cared about and leaving only degrees and
certificates—an air of respectability—in their place. What was happening
now had happened before. This was the second severing of mother and
daughter. The tape was playing in a loop.
No one saw the car leave the road. My brother Tyler, who was seventeen,
fell asleep at the wheel. It was six in the morning and he’d been driving in
silence for most of the night, piloting our station wagon through Arizona,
Nevada and Utah. We were in Cornish, a farming town twenty miles south
of Buck’s Peak, when the station wagon drifted over the center line into the
other lane, then left the highway. The car jumped a ditch, smashed through
two utility poles of thick cedar, and was finally brought to a stop only when
it collided with a row-crop tractor.
—
THE TRIP HAD BEEN Mother’s idea.
A few months earlier, when crisp leaves had begun slipping to the ground,
signaling the end of summer, Dad had been in high spirits. His feet tapped
show tunes at breakfast, and during dinner he often pointed at the mountain,
his eyes shining, and described where he would lay the pipes to bring water
down to the house. Dad promised that when the first snow fell, he’d build
the biggest snowball in the state of Idaho. What he’d do, he said, was hike to
the mountain base and gather a small, insignificant ball of snow, then roll it
down the hillside, watching it triple in size each time it raced over a hillock
or down a ravine. By the time it reached the house, which was atop the last
hill before the valley, it’d be big as Grandpa’s barn and people on the
highway would stare up at it, amazed. We just needed the right snow. Thick,
sticky flakes. After every snowfall, we brought handfuls to him and watched
him rub the flakes between his fingers. That snow was too fine. This, too
wet. After Christmas, he said. That’s when you get the real snow.
But after Christmas Dad seemed to deflate, to collapse in on himself. He
stopped talking about the snowball, then he stopped talking altogether. A
darkness gathered in his eyes until it filled them. He walked with his arms
limp, shoulders slumping, as if something had hold of him and was dragging
him to the earth.
By January Dad couldn’t get out of bed. He lay flat on his back, staring
blankly at the stucco ceiling with its intricate pattern of ridges and veins. He
didn’t blink when I brought his dinner plate each night. I’m not sure he
knew I was there.
That’s when Mother announced we were going to Arizona. She said Dad
was like a sunflower—he’d die in the snow—and that come February he
needed to be taken away and planted in the sun. So we piled into the station
wagon and drove for twelve hours, winding through canyons and speeding
over dark freeways, until we arrived at the mobile home in the parched
Arizona desert where my grandparents were waiting out the winter.
We arrived a few hours after sunrise. Dad made it as far as Grandma’s
porch, where he stayed for the rest of the day, a knitted pillow under his
head, a callused hand on his stomach. He kept that posture for two days,
eyes open, not saying a word, still as a bush in that dry, windless heat.
On the third day he seemed to come back into himself, to become aware
of the goings-on around him, to listen to our mealtime chatter rather than
staring, unresponsive, at the carpet. After dinner that night, Grandma played
her phone messages, which were mostly neighbors and friends saying hello.
Then a woman’s voice came through the speaker to remind Grandma of her
doctor’s appointment the following day. That message had a dramatic effect
on Dad.
At first Dad asked Grandma questions: what was the appointment for,
who was it with, why would she see a doctor when Mother could give her
tinctures.
Dad had always believed passionately in Mother’s herbs, but that night felt
different, like something inside him was shifting, a new creed taking hold.
Herbalism, he said, was a spiritual doctrine that separated the wheat from
the tares, the faithful from the faithless. Then he used a word I’d never heard
before: Illuminati. It sounded exotic, powerful, whatever it was. Grandma,
he said, was an unknowing agent of the Illuminati.
God couldn’t abide faithlessness, Dad said. That’s why the most hateful
sinners were those who wouldn’t make up their minds, who used herbs and
medication both, who came to Mother on Wednesday and saw their doctor
on Friday—or, as Dad put it, “Who worship at the altar of God one day and
offer a sacrifice to Satan the next.” These people were like the ancient
Israelites because they’d been given a true religion but hankered after false
idols.
“Doctors and pills,” Dad said, nearly shouting. “That’s their god, and they
whore after it.”
Mother was staring at her food. At the word “whore” she stood, threw
Dad an angry look, then walked into her room and slammed the door.
Mother didn’t always agree with Dad. When Dad wasn’t around, I’d heard
her say things that he—or at least this new incarnation of him—would have
called sacrilege, things like, “Herbs are supplements. For something serious,
you should go to a doctor.”
Dad took no notice of Mother’s empty chair. “Those doctors aren’t trying
to save you,” he told Grandma. “They’re trying to kill you.”
When I think of that dinner, the scene comes back to me clearly. I’m
sitting at the table. Dad is talking, his voice urgent. Grandma sits across
from me, chewing her asparagus again and again in her crooked jaw, the
way a goat might, sipping from her ice water, giving no indication that she’s
heard a word Dad has said, except for the occasional vexed glare she throws
the clock when it tells her it’s still too early for bed. “You’re a knowing
participant in the plans of Satan,” Dad says.
This scene played every day, sometimes several times a day, for the rest of
the trip. All followed a similar script. Dad, his fervor kindled, would drone
for an hour or more, reciting the same lines over and over, fueled by some
internal passion that burned long after the rest of us had been lectured into a
cold stupor.
Grandma had a memorable way of laughing at the end of these sermons.
It was a sort of sigh, a long, drawn-out leaking of breath, that finished with
her eyes rolling upward in a lazy imitation of exasperation, as if she wanted
to throw her hands in the air but was too tired to complete the gesture. Then
she’d smile—not a soothing smile for someone else but a smile for herself,
of baffled amusement, a smile that to me always seemed to say, Ain’t nothin’
funnier than real life, I tell you what.
—
IT WAS A SCORCHING AFTERNOON, so hot you couldn’t walk barefoot on the
pavement, when Grandma took me and Richard for a drive through the
desert, having wrestled us into seatbelts, which we’d never worn before. We
drove until the road began to incline, then kept driving as the asphalt turned
to dust beneath our tires, and still we kept going, Grandma weaving higher
and higher into the bleached hills, coming to a stop only when the dirt road
ended and a hiking trail began. Then we walked. Grandma was winded after
a few minutes, so she sat on a flat red stone and pointed to a sandstone rock
formation in the distance, formed of crumbling spires, each a little ruin, and
told us to hike to it. Once there, we were to hunt for nuggets of black rock.
“They’re called Apache tears,” she said. She reached into her pocket and
pulled out a small black stone, dirty and jagged, covered in veins of gray
and white like cracked glass. “And this is how they look after they’ve been
polished a bit.” From her other pocket she withdrew a second stone, which
was inky black and so smooth it felt soft.
Richard identified both as obsidian. “These are volcanic rock,” he said in
his best encyclopedic voice. “But this isn’t.” He kicked a washed-out stone
and waved at the formation. “This is sediment.” Richard had a talent for
scientific trivia. Usually I ignored his lecturing but today I was gripped by
it, and by this strange, thirsty terrain. We hiked around the formation for an
hour, returning to Grandma with our shirtfronts sagging with stones.
Grandma was pleased; she could sell them. She put them in the trunk, and
as we made our way back to the trailer, she told us the legend of the Apache
tears.
According to Grandma, a hundred years ago a tribe of Apaches had
fought the U.S. Cavalry on those faded rocks. The tribe was outnumbered:
the battle lost, the war over. All that was left to do was wait to die. Soon
after the battle began, the warriors became trapped on a ledge. Unwilling to
suffer a humiliating defeat, cut down one by one as they tried to break
through the cavalry, they mounted their horses and charged off the face of
the mountain. When the Apache women found their broken bodies on the
rocks below, they cried huge, desperate tears, which turned to stone when
they touched the earth.
Grandma never told us what happened to the women. The Apaches were
at war but had no warriors, so perhaps she thought the ending too bleak to
say aloud. The word “slaughter” came to mind, because slaughter is the
word for it, for a battle when one side mounts no defense. It’s the word we
used on the farm. We slaughtered chickens, we didn’t fight them. A
slaughter was the likely outcome of the warriors’ bravery. They died as
heroes, their wives as slaves.
As we drove to the trailer, the sun dipping in the sky, its last rays reaching
across the highway, I thought about the Apache women. Like the sandstone
altar on which they had died, the shape of their lives had been determined
years before—before the horses began their gallop, their sorrel bodies
arching for that final collision. Long before the warriors’ leap it was decided
how the women would live and how they would die. By the warriors, by the
women themselves. Decided. Choices, numberless as grains of sand, had
layered and compressed, coalescing into sediment, then into rock, until all
was set in stone.
—
I HAD NEVER BEFORE left the mountain and I ached for it, for the sight of the
Princess etched in pine across the massif. I found myself glancing at the
vacant Arizona sky, hoping to see her black form swelling out of the earth,
laying claim to her half of the heavens. But she was not there. More than the
sight of her, I missed her caresses—the wind she sent through canyons and
ravines to sweep through my hair every morning. In Arizona, there was no
wind. There was just one heat-stricken hour after another.
I spent my days wandering from one side of the trailer to the other, then
out the back door, across the patio, over to the hammock, then around to the
front porch, where I’d step over Dad’s semiconscious form and back inside
again. It was a great relief when, on the sixth day, Grandpa’s four-wheeler
broke down and Tyler and Luke took it apart to find the trouble. I sat on a
large barrel of blue plastic, watching them, wondering when we could go
home. When Dad would stop talking about the Illuminati. When Mother
would stop leaving the room whenever Dad entered it.
That night after dinner, Dad said it was time to go. “Get your stuff,” he
said. “We’re hitting the road in a half hour.” It was early evening, which
Grandma said was a ridiculous time to begin a twelve-hour drive. Mother
said we should wait until morning, but Dad wanted to get home so he and
the boys could scrap the next morning. “I can’t afford to lose any more work
days,” he said.
Mother’s eyes darkened with worry, but she said nothing.
—
I AWOKE WHEN THE CAR HIT the first utility pole. I’d been asleep on the floor
under my sister’s feet, a blanket over my head. I tried to sit up but the car
was shaking, lunging—it felt like it was coming apart—and Audrey fell on
top of me. I couldn’t see what was happening but I could feel and hear it.
Another loud thud, a lurch, my mother screaming, “Tyler!” from the front
seat, and a final violent jolt before everything stopped and silence set in.
Several seconds passed in which nothing happened.
Then I heard Audrey’s voice. She was calling our names one by one. Then
she said, “Everyone’s here except Tara!”
I tried to shout but my face was wedged under the seat, my cheek pressed
to the floor. I struggled under Audrey’s weight as she shouted my name.
Finally, I arched my back and pushed her off, then stuck my head out of the
blanket and said, “Here.”
I looked around. Tyler had twisted his upper body so that he was
practically climbing into the backseat, his eyes bulging as he took in every
cut, every bruise, every pair of wide eyes. I could see his face but it didn’t
look like his face. Blood gushed from his mouth and down his shirt. I closed
my eyes, trying to forget the twisted angles of his bloodstained teeth. When
I opened them again, it was to check everyone else. Richard was holding his
head, a hand over each ear like he was trying to block out a noise. Audrey’s
nose was strangely hooked and blood was streaming from it down her arm.
Luke was shaking but I couldn’t see any blood. I had a gash on my forearm
from where the seat’s frame had caught hold of me.
“Everyone all right?” My father’s voice. There was a general mumble.
“There are power lines on the car,” Dad said. “Nobody gets out till
they’ve shut them off.” His door opened, and for a moment I thought he’d
been electrocuted, but then I saw he’d pitched himself far enough so that his
body had never touched the car and the ground at the same time. I
remember peering at him through my shattered window as he circled the
car, his red cap pushed back so the brim reached upward, licking the air. He
looked strangely boyish.
He circled the car then stopped, crouching low, bringing his head level
with the passenger seat. “Are you okay?” he said. Then he said it again. The
third time he said it, his voice quivered.
I leaned over the seat to see who he was talking to, and only then realized
how serious the accident had been. The front half of the car had been
compressed, the engine arched, curving back over itself, like a fold in solid
rock.
There was a glare on the windshield from the morning sun. I saw
crisscrossing patterns of fissures and cracks. The sight was familiar. I’d seen
hundreds of shattered windshields in the junkyard, each one unique, with its
particular spray of gossamer extruding from the point of impact, a chronicle
of the collision. The cracks on our windshield told their own story. Their
epicenter was a small ring with fissures circling outward. The ring was
directly in front of the passenger seat.
“You okay?” Dad pleaded. “Honey, can you hear me?”
Mother was in the passenger seat. Her body faced away from the window.
I couldn’t see her face, but there was something terrifying in the way she
slumped against her seat.
“Can you hear me?” Dad said. He repeated this several times. Eventually,
in a movement so small it was almost imperceptible, I saw the tip of
Mother’s ponytail dip as she nodded.
Dad stood, looking at the active power lines, looking at the earth, looking
at Mother. Looking helpless. “Do you think—should I call an ambulance?”
I think I heard him say that. And if he did, which surely he must have,
Mother must have whispered a reply, or maybe she wasn’t able to whisper
anything, I don’t know. I’ve always imagined that she asked to be taken
home.
I was told later that the farmer whose tractor we’d hit rushed from his
house. He’d called the police, which we knew would bring trouble because
the car wasn’t insured, and none of us had been wearing seatbelts. It took
perhaps twenty minutes after the farmer informed Utah Power of the
accident for them to switch off the deadly current pulsing through the lines.
Then Dad lifted Mother from the station wagon and I saw her face—her
eyes, hidden under dark circles the size of plums, and the swelling distorting
her soft features, stretching some, compressing others.
I don’t know how we got home, or when, but I remember that the
mountain face glowed orange in the morning light. Once inside, I watched
Tyler spit streams of crimson down the bathroom sink. His front teeth had
smashed into the steering wheel and been displaced, so that they jutted
backward toward the roof of his mouth.
Mother was laid on the sofa. She mumbled that the light hurt her eyes.
We closed the blinds. She wanted to be in the basement, where there were
no windows, so Dad carried her downstairs and I didn’t see her for several
hours, not until that evening, when I used a dull flashlight to bring her
dinner. When I saw her, I didn’t know her. Both eyes were a deep purple, so
deep they looked black, and so swollen I couldn’t tell whether they were
open or closed. She called me Audrey, even after I corrected her twice.
“Thank you, Audrey, but just dark and quiet, that’s fine. Dark. Quiet. Thank
you. Come check on me again, Audrey, in a little while.”
Mother didn’t come out of the basement for a week. Every day the
swelling worsened, the black bruises turned blacker. Every night I was sure
her face was as marked and deformed as it was possible for a face to be, but
every morning it was somehow darker, more tumid. After a week, when the
sun went down, we turned off the lights and Mother came upstairs. She
looked as if she had two objects strapped to her forehead, large as apples,
black as olives.
There was never any more talk of a hospital. The moment for such a
decision had passed, and to return to it would be to return to all the fury and
fear of the accident itself. Dad said doctors couldn’t do anything for her
anyhow. She was in God’s hands.
In the coming months, Mother called me by many names. When she
called me Audrey I didn’t worry, but it was troubling when we had
conversations in which she referred to me as Luke or Tony, and in the family
it has always been agreed, even by Mother herself, that she’s never been
quite the same since the accident. We kids called her Raccoon Eyes. We
thought it was a great joke, once the black rings had been around for a few
weeks, long enough for us to get used to them and make them the subject of
jokes. We had no idea it was a medical term. Raccoon eyes. A sign of
serious brain injury.
Tyler’s guilt was all-consuming. He blamed himself for the accident, then
kept on blaming himself for every decision that was made thereafter, every
repercussion, every reverberation that clanged down through the years. He
laid claim to that moment and all its consequences, as if time itself had
commenced the instant our station wagon left the road, and there was no
history, no context, no agency of any kind until he began it, at the age of
seventeen, by falling asleep at the wheel. Even now, when Mother forgets
any detail, however trivial, that look comes into his eyes—the one he had in
the moments after the collision, when blood poured from his own mouth as
he took in the scene, raking his eyes over what he imagined to be the work
of his hands and his hands only.
Me, I never blamed anyone for the accident, least of all Tyler. It was just
one of those things. A decade later my understanding would shift, part of
my heavy swing into adulthood, and after that the accident would always
make me think of the Apache women, and of all the decisions that go into
making a life—the choices people make, together and on their own, that
combine to produce any single event. Grains of sand, incalculable, pressing
into sediment, then rock.
The mountain thawed and the Princess appeared on its face, her head
brushing the sky. It was Sunday, a month after the accident, and everyone
had gathered in the living room. Dad had begun to expound a scripture
when Tyler cleared his throat and said he was leaving.
“I’m g-g-going to c-college,” he said, his face rigid. A vein in his neck
bulged as he forced the words out, appearing and disappearing every few
seconds, a great, struggling snake.
Everyone looked at Dad. His expression was folded, impassive. The
silence was worse than shouting.
Tyler would be the third of my brothers to leave home. My oldest brother,
Tony, drove rigs, hauling gravel or scrap, trying to scrape together enough
money to marry the girl down the road. Shawn, the next oldest, had
quarreled with Dad a few months before and taken off. I hadn’t seen him
since, though Mother got a hurried call every few weeks telling her he was
fine, that he was welding or driving rigs. If Tyler left too, Dad wouldn’t have
a crew, and without a crew he couldn’t build barns or hay sheds. He would
have to fall back on scrapping.
“What’s college?” I said.
“College is extra school for people too dumb to learn the first time
around,” Dad said. Tyler stared at the floor, his face tense. Then his
shoulders dropped, his face relaxed and he looked up; it seemed to me that
he’d stepped out of himself. His eyes were soft, pleasant. I couldn’t see him
in there at all.
He listened to Dad, who settled into a lecture. “There’s two kinds of them
college professors,” Dad said. “Those who know they’re lying, and those
who think they’re telling the truth.” Dad grinned. “Don’t know which is
worse, come to think of it, a bona fide agent of the Illuminati, who at least
knows he’s on the devil’s payroll, or a high-minded professor who thinks his
wisdom is greater than God’s.” He was still grinning. The situation wasn’t
serious; he just needed to talk some sense into his son.
Mother said Dad was wasting his time, that nobody could talk Tyler out
of anything once his mind was made up. “You may as well take a broom and
start sweeping dirt off the mountain,” she said. Then she stood, took a few
moments to steady herself, and trudged downstairs.
She had a migraine. She nearly always had a migraine. She was still
spending her days in the basement, coming upstairs only after the sun had
gone down, and even then she rarely stayed more than an hour before the
combination of noise and exertion made her head throb. I watched her slow,
careful progress down the steps, her back bent, both hands gripping the rail,
as if she were blind and had to feel her way. She waited for both feet to plant
solidly on one step before reaching for the next. The swelling in her face was
nearly gone, and she almost looked like herself again, except for the rings,
which had gradually faded from black to dark purple, and were now a mix
of lilac and raisin.
An hour later Dad was no longer grinning. Tyler had not repeated his wish
to go to college, but he had not promised to stay, either. He was just sitting
there, behind that vacant expression, riding it out. “A man can’t make a
living out of books and scraps of paper,” Dad said. “You’re going to be the
head of a family. How can you support a wife and children with books?”
Tyler tilted his head, showed he was listening, and said nothing.
“A son of mine, standing in line to get brainwashed by socialists and
Illuminati spies—”
“The s-s-school’s run by the ch-ch-church,” Tyler interrupted. “How b bad can it b-be?”
Dad’s mouth flew open and a gust of air rushed out. “You don’t think the
Illuminati have infiltrated the church?” His voice was booming; every word
reverberated with a powerful energy. “You don’t think the first place they’d
go is that school, where they can raise up a whole generation of socialist
Mormons? I raised you better than that!”
I will always remember my father in this moment, the potency of him,
and the desperation. He leans forward, jaw set, eyes narrow, searching his
son’s face for some sign of agreement, some crease of shared conviction. He
doesn’t find it.
—
THE STORY OF HOW TYLER decided to leave the mountain is a strange one, full
of gaps and twists. It begins with Tyler himself, with the bizarre fact of him.
It happens sometimes in families: one child who doesn’t fit, whose rhythm
is off, whose meter is set to the wrong tune. In our family, that was Tyler. He
was waltzing while the rest of us hopped a jig; he was deaf to the raucous
music of our lives, and we were deaf to the serene polyphony of his.
Tyler liked books, he liked quiet. He liked organizing and arranging and
labeling. Once, Mother found a whole shelf of matchboxes in his closet,
stacked by year. Tyler said they contained his pencil shavings from the past
five years, which he had collected to make fire starters for our “head for the
hills” bags. The rest of the house was pure confusion: piles of unwashed
laundry, oily and black from the junkyard, littered the bedroom floors; in the
kitchen, murky jars of tincture lined every table and cabinet, and these were
only cleared away to make space for even messier projects, perhaps to skin a
deer carcass or strip Cosmoline off a rifle. But in the heart of this chaos,
Tyler had half a decade’s pencil shavings, cataloged by year.
My brothers were like a pack of wolves. They tested each other
constantly, with scuffles breaking out every time some young pup hit a
growth spurt and dreamed of moving up. When I was young these tussles
usually ended with Mother screaming over a broken lamp or vase, but as I
got older there were fewer things left to break. Mother said we’d owned a
TV once, when I was a baby, until Shawn had put Tyler’s head through it.
While his brothers wrestled, Tyler listened to music. He owned the only
boom box I had ever seen, and next to it he kept a tall stack of CDs with
strange words on them, like “Mozart” and “Chopin.” One Sunday afternoon,
when he was perhaps sixteen, he caught me looking at them. I tried to run,
because I thought he might wallop me for being in his room, but instead he
took my hand and led me to the stack. “W-which one do y-you like best?”
he said.
One was black, with a hundred men and women dressed in white on the
cover. I pointed to it. Tyler eyed me skeptically. “Th-th-this is ch-ch-choir
music,” he said.
He slipped the disc into the black box, then sat at his desk to read. I
squatted on the floor by his feet, scratching designs into the carpet. The
music began: a breath of strings, then a whisper of voices, chanting, soft as
silk, but somehow piercing. The hymn was familiar to me—we’d sung it at
church, a chorus of mismatched voices raised in worship—but this was
different. It was worshipful, but it was also something else, something to do
with study, discipline and collaboration. Something I didn’t yet understand.
The song ended and I sat, paralyzed, as the next played, and the next,
until the CD finished. The room felt lifeless without the music. I asked Tyler
if we could listen to it again, and an hour later, when the music stopped, I
begged him to restart it. It was very late, and the house quiet, when Tyler
stood from his desk and pushed play, saying this was the last time.
“W-w-we can l-l-listen again tomorrow,” he said.
Music became our language. Tyler’s speech impediment kept him quiet,
made his tongue heavy. Because of that, he and I had never talked much; I
had not known my brother. Now, every evening when he came in from the
junkyard, I would be waiting for him. After he’d showered, scrubbing the
day’s grime from his skin, he’d settle in at his desk and say, “W-w-what
shall we l-l-listen t-t-to tonight?” Then I would choose a CD, and he would
read while I lay on the floor next to his feet, eyes fixed on his socks, and
listened.
I was as rowdy as any of my brothers, but when I was with Tyler I
transformed. Maybe it was the music, the grace of it, or maybe it was his
grace. Somehow he made me see myself through his eyes. I tried to
remember not to shout. I tried to avoid fights with Richard, especially the
kind that ended with the two of us rolling on the floor, him pulling my hair,
me dragging my fingernails through the softness of his face.
I should have known that one day Tyler would leave. Tony and Shawn had
gone, and they’d belonged on the mountain in a way that Tyler never did.
Tyler had always loved what Dad called “book learning,” which was
something the rest of us, with the exception of Richard, were perfectly
indifferent to.
There had been a time, when Tyler was a boy, when Mother had been
idealistic about education. She used to say that we were kept at home so we
could get a better education than other kids. But it was only Mother who
said that, as Dad thought we should learn more practical skills. When I was
very young, that was the battle between them: Mother trying to hold school
every morning, and Dad herding the boys into the junkyard the moment her
back was turned.
But Mother would lose that battle, eventually. It began with Luke, the
fourth of her five sons. Luke was smart when it came to the mountain—he
worked with animals in a way that made it seem like he was talking to them
—but he had a severe learning disability and struggled to learn to read.
Mother spent five years sitting with him at the kitchen table every morning,
explaining the same sounds again and again, but by the time he was twelve,
it was all Luke could do to cough out a sentence from the Bible during
family scripture study. Mother couldn’t understand it. She’d had no trouble
teaching Tony and Shawn to read, and everyone else had just sort of picked
it up. Tony had taught me to read when I was four, to win a bet with Shawn,
I think.
Once Luke could scratch out his name and read short, simple phrases,
Mother turned to math. What math I was ever taught I learned doing the
breakfast dishes and listening to Mother explain, over and over, what a
fraction is or how to use negative numbers. Luke never made any progress,
and after a year Mother gave up. She stopped talking about us getting a
better education than other kids. She began to echo Dad. “All that really
matters,” she said to me one morning, “is that you kids learn to read. That
other twaddle is just brainwashing.” Dad started coming in earlier and
earlier to round up the boys until, by the time I was eight, and Tyler sixteen,
we’d settled into a routine that omitted school altogether.
Mother’s conversion to Dad’s philosophy was not total, however, and
occasionally she was possessed of her old enthusiasm. On those days, when
the family was gathered around the table, eating breakfast, Mother would
announce that today we were doing school. She kept a bookshelf in the
basement, stocked with books on herbalism, along with a few old
paperbacks. There were a few textbooks on math, which we shared, and an
American history book that I never saw anyone read except Richard. There
was also a science book, which must have been for young children because
it was filled with glossy illustrations.
It usually took half an hour to find all the books, then we would divide
them up and go into separate rooms to “do school.” I have no idea what my
siblings did when they did school, but when I did it I opened my math book
and spent ten minutes turning pages, running my fingers down the center
fold. If my finger touched fifty pages, I’d report to Mother that I’d done fifty
pages of math.
“Amazing!” she’d say. “You see? That pace would never be possible in the
public school. You can only do that at home, where you can sit down and
really focus, with no distractions.”
Mother never delivered lectures or administered exams. She never
assigned essays. There was a computer in the basement with a program
called Mavis Beacon, which gave lessons on typing.
Sometimes, when she was delivering herbs, if we’d finished our chores,
Mother would drop us at the Carnegie library in the center of town. The
basement had a room full of children’s books, which we read. Richard even
took books from upstairs, books for adults, with heavy titles about history
and science.
Learning in our family was entirely self-directed: you could learn
anything you could teach yourself, after your work was done. Some of us
were more disciplined than others. I was one of the least disciplined, so by
the time I was ten, the only subject I had studied systematically was Morse
code, because Dad insisted that I learn it. “If the lines are cut, we’ll be the
only people in the valley who can communicate,” he said, though I was
never quite sure, if we were the only people learning it, who we’d be
communicating with.
The older boys—Tony, Shawn and Tyler—had been raised in a different
decade, and it was almost as if they’d had different parents. Their father had
never heard of the Weavers; he never talked about the Illuminati. He’d
enrolled his three oldest sons in school, and even though he’d pulled them
out a few years later, vowing to teach them at home, when Tony had asked to
go back, Dad had let him. Tony had stayed in school through high school,
although he missed so many days working in the junkyard that he wasn’t
able to graduate.
Because Tyler was the third son, he barely remembered school and was
happy to study at home. Until he turned thirteen. Then, perhaps because
Mother was spending all her time teaching Luke to read, Tyler asked Dad if
he could enroll in the eighth grade.
Tyler stayed in school that whole year, from the fall of 1991 through the
spring of 1992. He learned algebra, which felt as natural to his mind as air to
his lungs. Then the Weavers came under siege that August. I don’t know if
Tyler would have gone back to school, but I know that after Dad heard about
the Weavers, he never again allowed one of his children to set foot in a
public classroom. Still, Tyler’s imagination had been captured. With what
money he had he bought an old trigonometry textbook and continued to
study on his own. He wanted to learn calculus next but couldn’t afford
another book, so he went to the school and asked the math teacher for one.
The teacher laughed in his face. “You can’t teach yourself calculus,” he said.
“It’s impossible.” Tyler pushed back. “Give me a book, I think I can.” He
left with the book tucked under his arm.
The real challenge was finding time to study. Every morning at seven, my
father gathered his sons, divided them into teams and sent them out to tackle
the tasks of the day. It usually took about an hour for Dad to notice that
Tyler was not among his brothers. Then he’d burst through the back door
and stride into the house to where Tyler sat studying in his room. “What the
hell are you doing?” he’d shout, tracking clumps of dirt onto Tyler’s spotless
carpet. “I got Luke loading I-beams by himself—one man doing a two-man
job—and I come in here and find you sitting on your ass?”
If Dad had caught me with a book when I was supposed to be working,
I’d have skittered, but Tyler was steady. “Dad,” he’d say. “I’ll w-w-work
after l-l-lunch. But I n-n-need the morning to s-st-study.” Most mornings
they’d argue for a few minutes, then Tyler would surrender his pencil, his
shoulders slumping as he pulled on his boots and welding gloves. But there
were other mornings—mornings that always astonished me—when Dad
huffed out the back door, alone.
—
I DIDN’T BELIEVE TYLER would really go to college, that he would ever
abandon the mountain to join the Illuminati. I figured Dad had all summer
to bring Tyler to his senses, which he tried to do most days when the crew
came in for lunch. The boys would putter around the kitchen, dishing up
seconds and thirds, and Dad would stretch himself out on the hard linoleum
—because he was tired and needed to lie down, but was too dirty for
Mother’s sofa—and begin his lecture about the Illuminati.
One lunch in particular has lodged in my memory. Tyler is assembling
tacos from the fixings Mother has laid out: he lines up the shells on his
plate, three in a perfect row, then adds the hamburger, lettuce and tomatoes
carefully, measuring the amounts, perfectly distributing the sour cream. Dad
drones steadily. Then, just as Dad reaches the end of his lecture and takes a
breath to begin again, Tyler slides all three of the flawless tacos into
Mother’s juicer, the one she uses to make tinctures, and turns it on. A loud
roar howls through the kitchen, imposing a kind of silence. The roar ceases;
Dad resumes. Tyler pours the orange liquid into a glass and begins to drink,
carefully, delicately, because his front teeth are still loose, still trying to
jump out of his mouth. Many memories might be summoned to symbolize
this period of our lives, but this is the one that has stayed with me: of Dad’s
voice rising up from the floor while Tyler drinks his tacos.
As spring turned to summer, Dad’s resolve turned to denial—he acted as
if the argument were over and he had won. He stopped talking about Tyler’s
leaving and refused to hire a hand to replace him.
One warm afternoon, Tyler took me to visit Grandma- and Grandpa-over in-town, who lived in the same house where they’d raised Mother, a house
that could not have been more different from ours. The decor was not
expensive but it was well cared for—creamy white carpet on the floors, soft
floral paper on the walls, thick, pleated curtains in the windows. They
seldom replaced anything. The carpet, the wallpaper, the kitchen table and
countertops—everything was the same as it was in the slides I’d seen of my
mother’s childhood.
Dad didn’t like us spending time there. Before he retired Grandpa had
been a mailman, and Dad said no one worth our respect would have worked
for the Government. Grandma was even worse, Dad said. She was frivolous.
I didn’t know what that word meant, but he said it so often that I’d come to
associate it with her—with her creamy carpet and soft petal wallpaper.
Tyler loved it there. He loved the calm, the order, the soft way my
grandparents spoke to each other. There was an aura in that house that made
me feel instinctively, without ever being told, that I was not to shout, not to
hit anyone or tear through the kitchen at full speed. I did have to be told, and
told repeatedly, to leave my muddy shoes by the door.
“Off to college!” Grandma said once we were settled onto the floral-print
sofa. She turned to me. “You must be so proud of your brother!” Her eyes
squinted to accommodate her smile. I could see every one of her teeth.
Leave it to Grandma to think getting yourself brainwashed is something to
celebrate, I thought.
“I need the bathroom,” I said.
Alone in the hall I walked slowly, pausing with each step to let my toes
sink into the carpet. I smiled, remembering that Dad had said Grandma
could keep her carpet so white only because Grandpa had never done any
real work. “My hands might be dirty,” Dad had said, winking at me and
displaying his blackened fingernails. “But it’s honest dirt.”
—
WEEKS PASSED AND IT was full summer. One Sunday Dad called the family
together. “We’ve got a good supply of food,” he said. “We’ve got fuel and
water stored away. What we don’t got is money.” Dad took a twenty from his
wallet and crumpled it. “Not this fake money. In the Days of Abomination,
this won’t be worth a thing. People will trade hundred-dollar bills for a roll
of toilet paper.”
I imagined a world where green bills littered the highway like empty soda
cans. I looked around. Everyone else seemed to be imagining that too,
especially Tyler. His eyes were focused, determined. “I’ve got a little money
saved,” Dad said. “And your mother’s got some tucked away. We’re going to
change it into silver. That’s what people will be wishing they had soon,
silver and gold.”
A few days later, Dad came home with the silver, and even some gold.
The metal was in the form of coins, packed in small, heavy boxes, which he
carried through the house and piled in the basement. He wouldn’t let me
open them. “They aren’t for playing,” he said.
Some time after, Tyler took several thousand dollars—nearly all the
savings he had left after he’d paid the farmer for the tractor and Dad for the
station wagon—and bought his own pile of silver, which he stacked in the
basement next to the gun cabinet. He stood there for a long time,
considering the boxes, as if suspended between two worlds.
Tyler was a softer target: I begged and he gave me a silver coin as big as
my palm. The coin soothed me. It seemed to me that Tyler’s buying it was a
declaration of loyalty, a pledge to our family that despite the madness that
had hold of him, that made him want to go to school, ultimately he would
choose us. Fight on our side when The End came. By the time the leaves
began to change, from the juniper greens of summer to the garnet reds and
bronzed golds of autumn, that coin shimmered even in the lowest light,
polished by a thousand finger strokes. I’d taken comfort in the raw
physicality of it, certain that if the coin was real, Tyler’s leaving could not
be.
—
I AWOKE ONE MORNING in August to find Tyler packing his clothes, books and
CDs into boxes. He’d nearly finished by the time we sat down to breakfast. I
ate quickly, then went into his room and looked at his shelves, now empty
except for a single CD, the black one with the image of the people dressed
in white, which I now recognized as the Mormon Tabernacle Choir. Tyler
appeared in the doorway. “I’m l-l-leaving that f-f-for you,” he said. Then he
walked outside and hosed down his car, blasting away the Idaho dust until it
looked as though it had never seen a dirt road.
Dad finished his breakfast and left without a word. I understood why. The
sight of Tyler loading boxes into his car made me crazed. I wanted to scream
but instead I ran, out the back door and up through the hills toward the peak.
I ran until the sound of blood pulsing in my ears was louder than the
thoughts in my head; then I turned around and ran back, swinging around
the pasture to the red railroad car. I scrambled onto its roof just in time to
see Tyler close his trunk and turn in a circle, as if he wanted to say goodbye
but there was no one to say goodbye to. I imagined him calling my name
and pictured his face falling when I didn’t answer.
He was in the driver’s seat by the time I’d climbed down, and the car was
rumbling down the dirt road when I leapt out from behind an iron tank.
Tyler stopped, then got out and hugged me—not the crouching hug that
adults often give children but the other kind, both of us standing, him
pulling me into him and bringing his face close to mine. He said he would
miss me, then he let me go, stepping into his car and speeding down the hill
and onto the highway. I watched the dust settle.
Tyler rarely came home after that. He was building a new life for himself
across enemy lines. He made few excursions back to our side. I have almost
no memory of him until five years later, when I am fifteen, and he bursts
into my life at a critical moment. By then we are strangers.
It would be many years before I would understand what leaving that day
had cost him, and how little he had understood about where he was going.
Tony and Shawn had left the mountain, but they’d left to do what my father
had taught them to do: drive semis, weld, scrap. Tyler stepped into a void. I
don’t know why he did it and neither does he. He can’t explain where the
conviction came from, or how it burned brightly enough to shine through
the black uncertainty. But I’ve always supposed it was the music in his head,
some hopeful tune the rest of us couldn’t hear, the same secret melody he’d
been humming when he bought that trigonometry book, or saved all those
pencil shavings.
—
SUMMER WANED, SEEMING TO evaporate in its own heat. The days were still
hot but the evenings had begun to cool, the frigid hours after sunset claiming
more of each day. Tyler had been gone a month.
I was spending the afternoon with Grandma-over-in-town. I’d had a bath
that morning, even though it wasn’t Sunday, and I’d put on special clothes
with no holes or stains so that, scrubbed and polished, I could sit in
Grandma’s kitchen and watch her make pumpkin cookies. The autumn sun
poured in through gossamer curtains and onto marigold tiles, giving the
whole room an amber glow.
After Grandma slid the first batch into the oven, I went to the bathroom. I
passed through the hallway, with its soft white carpet, and felt a stab of
anger when I remembered that the last time I’d seen it, I’d been with Tyler.
The bathroom felt foreign. I took in the pearly sink, the rosy tint of the
carpet, the peach-colored rug. Even the toilet peeked out from under a
primrose covering. I took in my own reflection, framed by creamy tiles. I
looked nothing like myself, and I wondered for a moment if this was what
Tyler wanted, a pretty house with a pretty bathroom and a pretty sister to
visit him. Maybe this was what he’d left for. I hated him for that.
Near the tap there were a dozen pink and white soaps, shaped like swans
and roses, resting in an ivory-tinted shell. I picked up a swan, feeling its soft
shape give under pressure from my fingers. It was beautiful and I wanted to
take it. I pictured it in our basement bathroom, its delicate wings set against
the coarse cement. I imagined it lying in a muddy puddle on the sink,
surrounded by strips of curling yellowed wallpaper. I returned it to its shell.
Coming out, I walked into Grandma, who’d been waiting for me in the
hall.
“Did you wash your hands?” she asked, her tone sweet and buttery.
“No,” I said.
My reply soured the cream in her voice. “Why not?”
“They weren’t dirty.”
“You should always wash your hands after you use the toilet.”
“It can’t be that important,” I said. “We don’t even have soap in the
bathroom at home.”
“That’s not true,” she said. “I raised your mother better than that.”
I squared my stance, ready to argue, to tell Grandma again that we didn’t
use soap, but when I looked up, the woman I saw was not the woman I
expected to see. She didn’t seem frivolous, didn’t seem like the type who’d
waste an entire day fretting over her white carpet. In that moment she was
transformed. Maybe it was something in the shape of her eyes, the way they
squinted at me in disbelief, or maybe it was the hard line of her mouth,
which was clamped shut, determined. Or maybe it was nothing at all, just
the same old woman looking like herself and saying the things she always
said. Maybe her transformation was merely a temporary shift in my
perspective—for that moment, perhaps the perspective was his, that of the
brother I hated, and loved.
Grandma led me into the bathroom and watched as I washed my hands,
then directed me to dry them on the rose-colored towel. My ears burned, my
throat felt hot.
Dad picked me up soon after on his way home from a job. He pulled up
in his truck and honked for me to come out, which I did, my head bent low.
Grandma followed. I rushed into the passenger seat, displacing a toolbox
and welding gloves, while Grandma told Dad about my not washing. Dad
listened, sucking on his cheeks while his right hand fiddled with the
gearshift. A laugh was bubbling up inside him.
Having returned to my father, I felt the power of his person. A familiar
lens slid over my eyes and Grandma lost whatever strange power she’d had
over me an hour before.
“Don’t you teach your children to wash after they use the toilet?”
Grandma said.
Dad shifted the truck into gear. As it rolled forward he waved and said, “I
teach them not to piss on their hands.”
The winter after Tyler left, Audrey turned fifteen. She picked up her
driver’s license from the county courthouse and, on her way home, got a job
flipping burgers. Then she took a second job milking cows at four A.M. every
morning. For a year she’d been fighting with Dad, bucking under the
restraints he put on her. Now she had money; she had her own car; we
hardly saw her. The family was shrinking, the old hierarchy compressing.
Dad didn’t have enough of a crew to build hay sheds, so he went back to
scrapping. With Tyler gone, the rest of us were promoted: Luke, at sixteen,
became the eldest son, my father’s right hand, and Richard and I took his
place as grunts.
I remember the first morning I entered the junkyard as one of my father’s
crew. The earth was ice, even the air felt stiff. We were in the yard above the
lower pasture, which was overrun by hundreds of cars and trucks. Some
were old and broken down but most had been wrecked and they looked it—
bent, arched, twisted, the impression they gave was of crumpled paper, not
steel. In the center of the yard there was a lake of debris, vast and deep:
leaking car batteries, tangles of insulated copper wire, abandoned
transmissions, rusted sheets of corrugated tin, antique faucets, smashed
radiators, serrated lengths of luminous brass pipe, and on and on. It was
endless, a formless mass.
Dad led me to its edge.
“You know the difference between aluminum and stainless steel?” he
said.
“I think so.”
“Come here.” His tone was impatient. He was used to dictating to grown
men. Having to explain his trade to a ten-year-old girl somehow made us
both feel small.
He yanked out a chunk of shimmering metal. “This here’s aluminum,” he
said. “See how it shines? Feel how light it is?” Dad put the piece into my
hand. He was right; it was not as heavy as it looked. Next Dad handed me a
dented pipe. “This here’s steel,” he said.
We began to sort the debris into piles—aluminum, iron, steel, copper—so
it could be sold. I picked up a piece of iron. It was dense with bronze rust,
and its jagged angles nibbled at my palms. I had a pair of leather gloves, but
when Dad saw them he said they’d slow me down. “You’ll get calluses real
quick,” he promised as I handed them over. I’d found a hard hat in the shop,
but Dad took that, too. “You’ll move slower trying to balance this silly thing
on your head,” he said.
Dad lived in fear of time. He felt it stalking him. I could see it in the
worried glances he gave the sun as it moved across the sky, in the anxious
way he appraised every length of pipe or cut of steel. Dad saw every piece of
scrap as the money it could be sold for, minus the time needed to sort, cut
and deliver it. Every slab of iron, every ring of copper tubing was a nickel, a
dime, a dollar—less if it took more than two seconds to extract and classify
—and he constantly weighed these meager profits against the hourly
expense of running the house. He figured that to keep the lights on, the
house warm, he needed to work at breakneck speed. I never saw Dad carry
anything to a sorting bin; he just chucked it, with all the strength he had,
from wherever he was standing.
The first time I saw him do it, I thought it was an accident, a mishap that
would be corrected. I hadn’t yet grasped the rules of this new world. I had
bent down, and was reaching for a copper coil, when something massive cut
through the air next to me. When I turned to see where it had come from, I
caught a steel cylinder full in the stomach.
The impact knocked me to the ground. “Oops!” Dad hollered. I rolled
over on the ice, winded. By the time I’d scrambled to my feet, Dad had
launched something else. I ducked but lost my footing and fell. This time I
stayed down. I was shaking but not from cold. My skin was alive and
tingling with the certainty of danger, yet when I looked for the source of that
danger, all I could see was a tired old man, tugging on a broken light fixture.
I remembered all the times I’d seen one of my brothers burst through the
back door, howling, pinching some part of his body that was gashed or
squashed or broken or burned. I remembered two years before, when a man
named Robert, who worked for Dad, had lost a finger. I remembered the
otherworldly pitch of his scream as he ran to the house. I remembered
staring at the bloody stump, and then at the severed finger, which Luke
brought in and placed on the counter. It looked like a prop from a magic
trick. Mother put it on ice and rushed Robert to town so the doctors could
sew it back on. Robert’s was not the only finger the junkyard had claimed. A
year before Robert, Shawn’s girlfriend, Emma, had come through the back
door shrieking. She’d been helping Shawn and lost half her index. Mother
had rushed Emma to town, too, but the flesh had been crushed, and there
was nothing they could do.
I looked at my own pink fingers, and in that moment the junkyard shifted.
As children, Richard and I had passed countless hours in the debris,
jumping from one mangled car to the next, looting some, leaving others. It
had been the backdrop for a thousand imagined battles—between demons
and wizards, fairies and goons, trolls and giants. Now it was changed. It had
ceased to be my childhood playground and had become its own reality, one
whose physical laws were mysterious, hostile.
I was remembering the strange pattern the blood had made as it streaked
down Emma’s wrist, smearing across her forearm, when I stood and, still
shaking, tried to pry loose the small length of copper tubing. I almost had it
when Dad flung a catalytic converter. I leapt aside, cutting my hand on the
serrated edge of a punctured tank. I wiped the blood on my jeans and
shouted, “Don’t throw them here! I’m here!”
Dad looked up, surprised. He’d forgotten I was there. When he saw the
blood, he walked over to me and put a hand on my shoulder. “Don’t worry,
honey,” he said. “God and his angels are here, working right alongside us.
They won’t let you be hurt.”
—
I WASN’T THE ONLY ONE whose feet were searching for solid ground. For six
months after the car accident, Mother had improved steadily and we’d
thought she would fully recover. The headaches had become less frequent,
so that she was shutting herself in the basement only two or three days a
week. Then the healing had slowed. Now it had been nine months. The
headaches persisted, and Mother’s memory was erratic. At least twice a
week she’d ask me to cook breakfast long after everyone had eaten and the
dishes had been cleared. She’d tell me to weigh a pound of yarrow for a
client, and I’d remind her that we’d delivered the yarrow the day before.
She’d begin mixing a tincture, then a minute later couldn’t remember which
ingredients she’d added, so that the whole batch had to be tossed.
Sometimes she would ask me to stand next to her and watch, so I could say,
“You already added the lobelia. Next is the blue vervain.”
Mother began to doubt whether she would ever midwife again, and while
she was saddened by this, Dad was devastated. His face sagged every time
Mother turned a woman away. “What if I have a migraine when she goes
into labor?” she told him. “What if I can’t remember what herbs I’ve given
her, or the baby’s heart rate?”
In the end it wasn’t Dad who convinced Mother to midwife again. She
convinced herself, perhaps because it was a part of herself she couldn’t
surrender without some kind of struggle. That winter, she midwifed two
babies that I remember. After the first she came home sickly and pale, as if
bringing that life into the world had taken a measure of her own. She was
shut in the basement when the second call came. She drove to the birth in
dark glasses, trying to peer through the waves distorting her vision. By the
time she arrived the headache was blinding, pulsing, driving out all thought.
She locked herself in a back room and her assistant delivered the baby. After
that, Mother was no longer the Midwife. On the next birth, she used the
bulk of her fee to hire a second midwife, to supervise her. Everyone was
supervising her now, it seemed. She had been an expert, an uncontested
power; now she had to ask her ten-year-old daughter whether she’d eaten
lunch. That winter was long and dark, and I wondered if sometimes Mother
was staying in bed even when she didn’t have a migraine.
At Christmas, someone gave her an expensive bottle of blended essential
oils. It helped her headaches, but at fifty dollars for a third of an ounce, we
couldn’t afford it. Mother decided to make her own. She began buying
single, unmixed oils—eucalyptus and helichrysum, sandalwood and
ravensara—and the house, which for years had smelled of earthy bark and
bitter leaves, suddenly smelled of lavender and chamomile. She spent whole
days blending oils, making adjustments to achieve specific fragrances and
attributes. She worked with a pad and pen so she could record every step as
she took it. The oils were much more expensive than the tinctures; it was
devastating when she had to throw out a batch because she couldn’t
remember whether she’d added the spruce. She made an oil for migraines
and an oil for menstrual cramps, one for sore muscles and one for heart
palpitations. In the coming years she would invent dozens more.
To create her formulas, Mother took up something called “muscle
testing,” which she explained to me as “asking the body what it needs and
letting it answer.” Mother would say to herself, aloud, “I have a migraine.
What will make it better?” Then she would pick up a bottle of oil, press it to
her chest and, with her eyes closed, say, “Do I need this?” If her body
swayed forward it meant yes, the oil would help her headache. If her body
swayed backward it meant no, and she would test something else.
As she became more skilled, Mother went from using her whole body to
only her fingers. She would cross her middle and index fingers, then flex
slightly to try to uncross them, asking herself a question. If the fingers
remained entwined that meant yes; if they parted it was no. The sound
produced by this method was faint but unmistakable: each time the pad of
her middle finger slipped across the nail of her index, there was a fleshy
click.
Mother used muscle testing to experiment with other methods of healing.
Diagrams of chakras and pressure points appeared around the house, and
she began charging clients for something called “energy work.” I didn’t
know what that meant until one afternoon when Mother called me and
Richard into the back room. A woman named Susan was there. Mother’s
eyes were closed and her left hand was resting on Susan’s. The fingers on
her other hand were crossed, and she was whispering questions to herself.
After a few she turned to the woman and said, “Your relationship with your
father is damaging your kidneys. Think of him while we adjust the chakra.”
Mother explained that energy work is most effective when several people
are present. “So we can draw from everyone’s energy,” she said. Mother
pointed to my forehead and told me to tap the center, between my eyebrows,
while with my other hand I was to grab Susan’s arm. Richard was to tap a
pressure point on his chest while reaching out to me with his other hand,
and Mother was to hold a point in her palm while touching Richard with her
foot. “That’s it,” she said as Richard took my arm. We stood in silence for
ten minutes, a human chain.
When I think of that afternoon, what I remember first is the awkwardness
of it: Mother said she could feel the hot energy moving through our bodies,
but I felt nothing. Mother and Richard stood still, eyes shut, breath shallow.
They could feel the energy and were transported by it. I fidgeted. I tried to
focus, then worried that I was ruining things for Susan, that I was a break in
the chain, that Mother and Richard’s healing power would never reach her
because I was failing to conduct it. When the ten minutes were up, Susan
gave Mother twenty dollars and the next customer came in.
If I was skeptical, my skepticism was not entirely my fault. It was the
result of my not being able to decide which of my mothers to trust. A year
before the accident, when Mother had first heard of muscle testing and
energy work, she’d dismissed both as wishful thinking. “People want a
miracle,” she’d told me. “They’ll swallow anything if it brings them hope, if
it lets them believe they’re getting better. But there’s no such thing as magic.
Nutrition, exercise and a careful study of herbal properties, that’s all there
is. But when they’re suffering, people can’t accept that.”
Now Mother said that healing was spiritual and limitless. Muscle testing,
she explained to me, was a kind of prayer, a divine supplication. An act of
faith in which God spoke through her fingers. In some moments I believed
her, this wise woman with an answer to every question; but I could never
quite forget the words of that other woman, that other mother, who was also
wise. There’s no such thing as magic.
One day Mother announced that she had reached a new skill level. “I no
longer need to say the question aloud,” she said. “I can just think it.”
That’s when I began to notice Mother moving around the house, her hand
resting lightly on various objects as she muttered to herself, her fingers
flexing in a steady rhythm. If she was making bread and wasn’t sure how
much flour she’d added. Click click click. If she was mixing oils and
couldn’t remember whether she’d added frankincense. Click click click.
She’d sit down to read her scriptures for thirty minutes, forget what time
she’d started, then muscle-test how long it had been. Click click click.
Mother began to muscle-test compulsively, unaware she was doing it,
whenever she grew tired of a conversation, whenever the ambiguities of her
memory, or even just those of normal life, left her unsatisfied. Her features
would slacken, her face become vacant, and her fingers would click like
crickets at dusk.
Dad was rapturous. “Them doctors can’t tell what’s wrong just by
touching you,” he said, glowing. “But Mother can!”
—
THE MEMORY OF TYLER haunted me that winter. I remembered the day he
left, how strange it was to see his car bumping down the hill loaded with
boxes. I couldn’t imagine where he was now, but sometimes I wondered if
perhaps school was less evil than Dad thought, because Tyler was the least
evil person I knew, and he loved school—loved it more, it seemed, than he
loved us.
The seed of curiosity had been planted; it needed nothing more than time
and boredom to grow. Sometimes, when I was stripping copper from a
radiator or throwing the five hundredth chunk of steel into the bin, I’d find
myself imagining the classrooms where Tyler was spending his days. My
interest grew more acute with every deadening hour in the junkyard, until
one day I had a bizarre thought: that I should enroll in the public school.
Mother had always said we could go to school if we wanted. We just had
to ask Dad, she said. Then we could go.
But I didn’t ask. There was something in the hard line of my father’s face,
in the quiet sigh of supplication he made every morning before he began
family prayer, that made me think my curiosity was an obscenity, an affront
to all he’d sacrificed to raise me.
I made some effort to keep up my schooling in the free time I had
between scrapping and helping Mother make tinctures and blend oils.
Mother had given up homeschooling by then, but still had a computer, and
there were books in the basement. I found the science book, with its
colorful illustrations, and the math book I remembered from years before. I
even located a faded green book of history. But when I sat down to study I
nearly always fell asleep. The pages were glossy and soft, made softer by the
hours I’d spent hauling scrap.
When Dad saw me with one of those books, he’d try to get me away from
them. Perhaps he was remembering Tyler. Perhaps he thought if he could
just distract me for a few years, the danger would pass. So he made up jobs
for me to do, whether they needed doing or not. One afternoon, after he’d
caught me looking at the math book, he and I spent an hour hauling buckets
of water across the field to his fruit trees, which wouldn’t have been at all
unusual except it was during a rainstorm.
But if Dad was trying to keep his children from being overly interested in
school and books—from being seduced by the Illuminati, like Tyler had
been—he would have done better to turn his attention to Richard. Richard
was also supposed to spend his afternoons making tinctures for Mother, but
he almost never did. Instead, he’d disappear. I don’t know if Mother knew
where he went, but I did. In the afternoons, Richard could nearly always be
found in the dark basement, wedged in the crawl space between the couch
and the wall, an encyclopedia propped open in front of him. If Dad
happened by he’d turn the light off, muttering about wasted electricity. Then
I’d find some excuse to go downstairs so I could turn it back on. If Dad
came through again, a snarl would sound through the house, and Mother
would have to sit through a lecture on leaving lights on in empty rooms. She
never scolded me, which makes me wonder if she did know where Richard
was. If I couldn’t get back down to turn on the light, Richard would pull the
book to his nose and read in the dark; he wanted to read that badly. He
wanted to read the encyclopedia that badly.
—
TYLER WAS GONE. There was hardly a trace he’d ever lived in the house,
except one: every night, after dinner, I would close the door to my room and
pull Tyler’s old boom box from under my bed. I’d dragged his desk into my
room, and while the choir sang I would settle into his chair and study, just as
I’d seen him do on a thousand nights. I didn’t study history or math. I
studied religion.
I read the Book of Mormon twice. I read the New Testament, once
quickly, then a second time more slowly, pausing to make notes, to cross reference, and even to write short essays on doctrines like faith and sacrifice.
No one read the essays; I wrote them for myself, the way I imagined Tyler
had studied for himself and himself only. I worked through the Old
Testament next, then I read Dad’s books, which were mostly compilations of
the speeches, letters and journals of the early Mormon prophets. Their
language was of the nineteenth century—stiff, winding, but exact—and at
first I understood nothing. But over time my eyes and ears adjusted, so that I
began to feel at home with those fragments of my people’s history: stories of
pioneers, my ancestors, striking out across the American wilderness. While
the stories were vivid, the lectures were abstract, treatises on obscure
philosophical subjects, and it was to these abstractions that I devoted most
of my study.
In retrospect, I see that this was my education, the one that would matter:
the hours I spent sitting at a borrowed desk, struggling to parse narrow
strands of Mormon doctrine in mimicry of a brother who’d deserted me.
The skill I was learning was a crucial one, the patience to read things I
could not yet understand.
—
BY THE TIME THE SNOW on the mountain began to melt, my hands were
thickly callused. A season in the junkyard had honed my reflexes: I’d
learned to listen for the low grunt that escaped Dad’s lips whenever he
tossed something heavy, and when I heard it I hit the dirt. I spent so much
time flat in the mud, I didn’t salvage much. Dad joked I was as slow as
molasses running uphill.
The memory of Tyler had faded, and with it had faded his music,
drowned out by the crack of metal crashing into metal. Those were the
sounds that played in my head at night now—the jingle of corrugated tin,
the short tap of copper wire, the thunder of iron.
I had entered into the new reality. I saw the world through my father’s
eyes. I saw the angels, or at least I imagined I saw them, watching us scrap,
stepping forward and catching the car batteries or jagged lengths of steel
tubing that Dad launched across the yard. I’d stopped shouting at Dad for
throwing them. Instead, I prayed.
I worked faster when I salvaged alone, so one morning when Dad was in
the northern tip of the yard, near the mountain, I headed for the southern
tip, near the pasture. I filled a bin with two thousand pounds of iron; then,
my arms aching, I ran to find Dad. The bin had to be emptied, and I couldn’t
operate the loader—a massive forklift with a telescopic arm and wide, black
wheels that were taller than I was. The loader would raise the bin some
twenty-five feet into the air and then, with the boom extended, tilt the forks
so the scrap could slide out, raining down into the trailer with a tremendous
clamor. The trailer was a fifty-foot flatbed rigged for scrapping, essentially a
giant bucket. Its walls were made of thick iron sheets that reached eight feet
from the bed. The trailer could hold between fifteen and twenty bins, or
about forty thousand pounds of iron.
I found Dad in the field, lighting a fire to burn the insulation from a tangle
of copper wires. I told him the bin was ready, and he walked back with me
and climbed into the loader. He waved at the trailer. “We’ll get more in if
you settle the iron after it’s been dumped. Hop in.”
I didn’t understand. He wanted to dump the bin with me in it? “I’ll climb
up after you’ve dumped the load,” I said.
“No, this’ll be faster,” Dad said. “I’ll pause when the bin’s level with the
trailer wall so you can climb out. Then you can run along the wall and perch
on top of the cab until the dump is finished.”
I settled myself on a length of iron. Dad jammed the forks under the bin,
then lifted me and the scrap and began driving, full throttle, toward the
trailer’s head. I could barely hold on. On the last turn, the bucket swung
with such force that a spike of iron was flung toward me. It pierced the
inside of my leg, an inch below my knee, sliding into the tissue like a knife
into warm butter. I tried to pull it out but the load had shifted, and it was
partially buried. I heard the soft groaning of hydraulic pumps as the boom
extended. The groaning stopped when the bin was level with the trailer. Dad
was giving me time to climb onto the trailer wall but I was pinned. “I’m
stuck!” I shouted, only the growl of the loader’s engine was too loud. I
wondered if Dad would wait to dump the bin until he saw me sitting safely
on the semi’s cab, but even as I wondered I knew he wouldn’t. Time was
still stalking.
The hydraulics groaned and the bin raised another eight feet. Dumping
position. I shouted again, higher this time, then lower, trying to find a pitch
that would pierce through the drone of the engine. The bin began its tilt,
slowly at first, then quickly. I was pinned near the back. I wrapped my hands
around the bin’s top wall, knowing this would give me a ledge to grasp when
the bin was vertical. As the bin continued to pitch, the scrap at the front
began to slide forward, bit by bit, a great iron glacier breaking apart. The
spike was still embedded in my leg, dragging me downward. My grip had
slipped and I’d begun to slide when the spike finally ripped from me and fell
away, smashing into the trailer with a tremendous crash. I was now free, but
falling. I flailed my arms, willing them to seize something that wasn’t
plunging downward. My palm caught hold of the bin’s side wall, which was
now nearly vertical. I pulled myself toward it and hoisted my body over its
edge, then continued my fall. Because I was now falling from the side of the
bin and not the front, I hoped—I prayed—that I was falling toward the
ground and not toward the trailer, which was at that moment a fury of
grinding metal. I sank, seeing only blue sky, waiting to feel either the stab of
sharp iron or the jolt of solid earth.
My back struck iron: the trailer’s wall. My feet snapped over my head and
I continued my graceless plunge to the ground. The first fall was seven or
eight feet, the second perhaps ten. I was relieved to taste dirt.
I lay on my back for perhaps fifteen seconds before the engine growled to
silence and I heard Dad’s heavy step.
“What happened?” he said, kneeling next to me.
“I fell out,” I wheezed. The wind had been knocked out of me, and there
was a powerful throbbing in my back, as if I’d been cut in two.
“How’d you manage that?” Dad said. His tone was sympathetic but
disappointed. I felt stupid. I should have been able to do it, I thought. It’s a
simple thing.
Dad examined the gash in my leg, which had been ripped wide as the
spike had fallen away. It looked like a pothole; the tissue had simply sunk
out of sight. Dad slipped out of his flannel shirt and pressed it to my leg.
“Go on home,” he said. “Mother will stop the bleeding.”
I limped through the pasture until Dad was out of sight, then collapsed in
the tall wheatgrass. I was shaking, gulping mouthfuls of air that never made
it to my lungs. I didn’t understand why I was crying. I was alive. I would be
fine. The angels had done their part. So why couldn’t I stop trembling?
I was light-headed when I crossed the last field and approached the house,
but I burst through the back door, as I’d seen my brothers do, as Robert and
Emma had done, shouting for Mother. When she saw the crimson footprints
streaked across the linoleum, she fetched the homeopathic she used to treat
hemorrhages and shock, called Rescue Remedy, and put twelve drops of the
clear, tasteless liquid under my tongue. She rested her left hand lightly on
the gash and crossed the fingers of her right. Her eyes closed. Click click
click. “There’s no tetanus,” she said. “The wound will close. Eventually. But
it’ll leave a nasty scar.”
She turned me onto my stomach and examined the bruise—a patch of
deep purple the size of a human head—that had formed a few inches above
my hip. Again her fingers crossed and her eyes closed. Click click click.
“You’ve damaged your kidney,” she said. “We’d better make a fresh batch
of juniper and mullein flower.”
—
THE GASH BELOW MY knee had formed a scab—dark and shiny, a black river
flowing through pink flesh—when I came to a decision.
I chose a Sunday evening, when Dad was resting on the couch, his Bible
propped open in his lap. I stood in front of him for what felt like hours, but
he didn’t look up, so I blurted out what I’d come to say: “I want to go to
school.”
He seemed not to have heard me.
“I’ve prayed, and I want to go,” I said.
Finally, Dad looked up and straight ahead, his gaze fixed on something
behind me. The silence settled, its presence heavy. “In this family,” he said,
“we obey the commandments of the Lord.”
He picked up his Bible and his eyes twitched as they jumped from line to
line. I turned to leave, but before I reached the doorway Dad spoke again.
“You remember Jacob and Esau?”
“I remember,” I said.
He returned to his reading, and I left quietly. I did not need any
explanation; I knew what the story meant. It meant that I was not the
daughter he had raised, the daughter of faith. I had tried to sell my birthright
for a mess of pottage.
It was a rainless summer. The sun blazed across the sky each afternoon,
scorching the mountain with its arid, desiccating heat, so that each morning
when I crossed the field to the barn, I felt stalks of wild wheat crackle and
break beneath my feet.
I spent an amber morning making the Rescue Remedy homeopathic for
Mother. I would take fifteen drops from the base formula—which was kept
in Mother’s sewing cupboard, where it would not be used or polluted—and
add them to a small bottle of distilled water. Then I would make a circle
with my index finger and my thumb, and push the bottle through the circle.
The strength of the homeopathic, Mother said, depended on how many
passes the bottle made through my fingers, how many times it drew on my
energy. Usually I stopped at fifty.
Dad and Luke were on the mountain, in the junkyard above the upper
pasture, a quarter mile from the house. They were preparing cars for the
crusher, which Dad had hired for later that week. Luke was seventeen. He
had a lean, muscular build and, when outdoors, an easy smile. Luke and
Dad were draining gasoline from the tanks. The crusher won’t take a car
with the fuel tank attached, because there’s a risk of explosion, so every
tank had to be drained and removed. It was slow work, puncturing the tank
with a hammer and stake, then waiting for the fuel to drip out so the tank
could be safely removed with a cutting torch. Dad had devised a shortcut: an
enormous skewer, eight feet tall, of thick iron. Dad would lift a car with the
forklift, and Luke would guide him until the car’s tank was suspended
directly over the spike. Then Dad would drop the forks. If all went well, the
car would be impaled on the spike and gasoline would gush from the tank,
streaming down the spike and into the flat-bottom container Dad had welded
in place to collect it.
By noon, they had drained somewhere between thirty and forty cars.
Luke had collected the fuel in five-gallon buckets, which he began to haul
across the yard to Dad’s flatbed. On one pass he stumbled, drenching his
jeans in a gallon of gas. The summer sun dried the denim in a matter of
minutes. He finished hauling the buckets, then went home for lunch.
I remember that lunch with unsettling clarity. I remember the clammy
smell of beef-and-potato casserole, and the jingle of ice cubes tumbling into
tall glasses, which sweated in the summer heat. I remember Mother telling
me I was on dish duty, because she was leaving for Utah after lunch to
consult for another midwife on a complicated pregnancy. She said she might
not make it home for dinner but there was hamburger in the freezer.
I remember laughing the whole hour. Dad lay on the kitchen floor
cracking jokes about an ordinance that had recently passed in our little
farming village. A stray dog had bitten a boy and everyone was up in arms.
The mayor had decided to limit dog ownership to two dogs per family, even
though the attacking dog hadn’t belonged to anybody at all.
“These genius socialists,” Dad said. “They’d drown staring up at the rain
if you didn’t build a roof over them.” I laughed so hard at that my stomach
ached.
Luke had forgotten all about the gasoline by the time he and Dad walked
back up the mountain and readied the cutting torch, but when he jammed
the torch into his hip and struck flint to steel, flames burst from the tiny
spark and engulfed his leg.
The part we would remember, would tell and retell so many times it
became family folklore, was that Luke was unable to get out of his gasoline soaked jeans. That morning, like every morning, he had hitched up his
trousers with a yard of baling twine, which is smooth and slippery, and
needs a horseman’s knot to stay in place. His footwear didn’t help, either:
bulbous steel-toed boots so tattered that for weeks he’d been duct-taping
them on each morning, then cutting them off each night with his
pocketknife. Luke might have severed the twine and hacked through the
boots in a matter of seconds, but he went mad with panic and took off,
dashing like a marked buck, spreading fire through the sagebrush and wheat
grass, which were baked and brittle from the parched summer.
—
I’D STACKED THE DIRTY dishes and was filling the kitchen sink when I heard it
—a shrill, strangled cry that began in one key and ended in another. There
was no question it was human. I’d never heard an animal bellow like that,
with such fluctuations in tone and pitch.
I ran outside and saw Luke hobbling across the grass. He screamed for
Mother, then collapsed. That’s when I saw that the jeans on his left leg were
gone, melted away. Parts of the leg were livid, red and bloody; others were
bleached and dead. Papery ropes of skin wrapped delicately around his thigh
and down his calf, like wax dripping from a cheap candle.
His eyes rolled back in his head.
I bolted back into the house. I’d packed the new bottles of Rescue
Remedy, but the base formula still sat on the counter. I snatched it and ran
outside, then dumped half the bottle between Luke’s twitching lips. There
was no change. His eyes were marble white.
One brown iris slipped into view, then the other. He began to mumble,
then to scream. “It’s on fire! It’s on fire!” he roared. A chill passed through
him and his teeth clattered; he was shivering.
I was only ten, and in that moment I felt very much a child. Luke was my
big brother; I thought he would know what to do, so I grabbed his shoulders
and shook him, hard. “Should I make you cold or make you hot?” I shouted.
He answered with a gasp.
The burn was the injury, I reasoned. It made sense to treat it first. I
fetched a pack of ice from the chest freezer on the patio, but when the pack
touched his leg he screamed—a back-arching, eye-popping scream that
made my brain claw at my skull. I needed another way to cool the leg. I
considered unloading the chest freezer and putting Luke inside it, but the
freezer would work only if the lid was shut, and then he’d suffocate.
I mentally searched the house. We had a large garbage can, a blue whale
of a bin. It was splattered with bits of rotted food, so rank we kept it shut
away in a closet. I sprinted into the house and emptied it onto the linoleum,
noting the dead mouse Richard had tossed in the day before, then I carried
the bin outside and sprayed it out with the garden hose. I knew I should
clean it more thoroughly, maybe with dish soap, but looking at Luke, the
way he was writhing on the grass, I didn’t feel I had time. With the last bit
of slop blasted away, I righted the bin and filled it with water.
Luke was scrambling toward me to put his leg in when I heard an echo of
my mother’s voice. She was telling someone that the real worry with a burn
isn’t the damaged tissue, but infection.
“Luke!” I shouted. “Don’t! Don’t put your leg in!”
He ignored me and continued crawling toward the bin. He had a cold look
in his eye that said nothing mattered except the fire burning from his leg into
his brain. I moved quickly. I shoved the bin, and a great wave of water
heaved over the grass. Luke made a gargled noise, as if he were choking.
I ran back into the kitchen and found the bags that fit the can, then held
one open for Luke and told him to put his leg in. He didn’t move, but he
allowed me to pull the bag over the raw flesh. I righted the can and stuffed
the garden hose inside. While the bin filled, I helped Luke balance on one
foot and lower his burned leg, now wrapped in black plastic, into the
garbage can. The afternoon air was sweltering; the water would warm
quickly; I tossed in the pack of ice.
It didn’t take long—twenty minutes, maybe thirty—before Luke seemed
in his right mind, calm and able to prop himself up. Then Richard wandered
up from the basement. The garbage can was smack in the middle of the
lawn, ten feet from any shade, and the afternoon sun was strong. Full of
water, the can was too heavy for us to move, and Luke refused to take out
his leg, even for a minute. I fetched a straw sombrero Grandma had given us
in Arizona. Luke’s teeth were still chattering so I also brought a wool
blanket. And there he stood, a sombrero on his head, a wool blanket around
his shoulders, and his leg in a garbage can. He looked something between
homeless and on vacation.
The sun warmed the water; Luke began to shift uncomfortably. I returned
to the chest freezer but there was no more ice, just a dozen bags of frozen
vegetables, so I dumped them in. The result was a muddy soup with bits of
peas and carrots.
Dad wandered home sometime after this, I couldn’t say how long, a
gaunt, defeated look on his face. Quiet now, Luke was resting, or as near to
resting as he could be standing up. Dad wheeled the bin into the shade
because, despite the hat, Luke’s hands and arms had turned red with
sunburn. Dad said the best thing to do was leave the leg where it was until
Mother came home.
Mother’s car appeared on the highway around six. I met her halfway up
the hill and told her what had happened. She rushed to Luke and said she
needed to see the leg, so he lifted it out, dripping. The plastic bag clung to
the wound. Mother didn’t want to tear the fragile tissue, so she cut the bag
away slowly, carefully, until the leg was visible. There was very little blood
and even fewer blisters, as both require skin and Luke didn’t have much.
Mother’s face turned a grayish yellow, but she was calm. She closed her
eyes and crossed her fingers, then asked aloud whether the wound was
infected. Click click click.
“You were lucky this time, Tara,” she said. “But what were you thinking,
putting a burn into a garbage can?”
Dad carried Luke inside and Mother fetched her scalpel. It took her and
Dad most of the evening to cut away the dead flesh. Luke tried not to
scream, but when they pried up and stretched bits of his skin, trying to see
where the dead flesh ended and the living began, he exhaled in great gusts
and tears slid from his eyes.
Mother dressed the leg in mullein and comfrey salve, her own recipe. She
was good with burns—they were a specialty of hers—but I could tell she
was worried. She said she’d never seen one as bad as Luke’s. She didn’t
know what would happen.
—
MOTHER AND I STAYED by Luke’s bed that first night. He barely slept, he was
so delirious with fever and pain. For the fever we put ice on his face and
chest; for the pain we gave him lobelia, blue vervain and skullcap. This was
another of Mother’s recipes. I’d taken it after I’d fallen from the scrap bin,
to dull the throbbing in my leg while I waited for the gash to close, but as
near as I could tell it had no effect.
I believed hospital drugs were an abomination to God, but if I’d had
morphine that night, I’d have given it to Luke. The pain robbed him of
breath. He lay propped up in his bed, beads of sweat falling from his
forehead onto his chest, holding his breath until he turned red, then purple,
as if depriving his brain of oxygen was the only way he could make it
through the next minute. When the pain in his lungs overtook the pain of the
burn, he would release the air in a great, gasping cry—a cry of relief for his
lungs, of agony for his leg.
I tended him alone the second night so Mother could rest. I slept lightly,
waking at the first sounds of fussing, at the slightest shifting of weight, so I
could fetch the ice and tinctures before Luke became fully conscious and the
pain gripped him. On the third night, Mother tended him and I stood in the
doorway, listening to his gasps, watching Mother watch him, her face
hollow, her eyes swollen with worry and exhaustion.
When I slept, I dreamed. I dreamed about the fire I hadn’t seen. I dreamed
it was me lying in that bed, my body wrapped in loose bandages,
mummified. Mother knelt on the floor beside me, pressing my plastered
hand the way she pressed Luke’s, dabbing my forehead, praying.
Luke didn’t go to church that Sunday, or the Sunday after that, or the one
after that. Dad told us to tell people Luke was sick. He said there’d be
trouble if the Government found out about Luke’s leg, that the Feds would
take us kids away. That they would put Luke in a hospital, where his leg
would get infected and he would die.
About three weeks after the fire, Mother announced that the skin around
the edges of the burn had begun to grow back, and that she had hope for
even the worst patches. By then Luke was sitting up, and a week later, when
the first cold spell hit, he could stand for a minute or two on crutches.
Before long, he was thumping around the house, thin as a string bean,
swallowing buckets of food to regain the weight he’d lost. By then, the twine
was a family fable.
“A man ought to have a real belt,” Dad said at breakfast on the day Luke
was well enough to return to the junkyard, handing him a leather strap with
a steel buckle.
“Not Luke,” Richard said. “He prefers twine, you know how fashionable
he is.”
Luke grinned. “Beauty’s everything,” he said.
—
FOR EIGHTEEN YEARS I never thought of that day, not in any probing way. The
few times my reminiscing carried me back to that torrid afternoon, what I
remembered first was the belt. Luke, I would think. You wild dog. I wonder,
do you still wear twine?
Now, at age twenty-nine, I sit down to write, to reconstruct the incident
from the echoes and shouts of a tired memory. I scratch it out. When I get to
the end, I pause. There’s an inconsistency, a ghost in this story.
I read it. I read it again. And there it is.
Who put out the fire?
A long-dormant voice says, Dad did.
But Luke was alone when I found him. If Dad had been with Luke on the
mountain, he would have brought him to the house, would have treated the
burn. Dad was away on a job somewhere, that’s why Luke had had to get
himself down the mountain. Why his leg had been treated by a ten-year-old.
Why it had ended up in a garbage can.
I decide to ask Richard. He’s older than I, and has a sharper memory.
Besides, last I heard, Luke no longer has a telephone.
I call. The first thing Richard remembers is the twine, which, true to his
nature, he refers to as a “baling implement.” Next he remembers the spilled
gasoline. I ask how Luke managed to put out the fire and get himself down
the mountain, given that he was in shock when I found him. Dad was with
him, Richard says flatly.
Right.
Then why wasn’t Dad at the house?
Richard says, Because Luke had run through the weeds and set the
mountain afire. You remember that summer. Dry, scorching. You can’t go
starting forest fires in farm country during a dry summer. So Dad put Luke
in the truck and told him to drive to the house, to Mother. Only Mother was
gone.
Right.
I think it over for a few days, then sit back down to write. Dad is there in
the beginning—Dad with his funny jokes about socialists and dogs and the
roof that keeps liberals from drowning. Then Dad and Luke go back up the
mountain, Mother drives away and I turn the tap to fill the kitchen sink.
Again. For the third time it feels like.
On the mountain something is happening. I can only imagine it but I see
it clearly, more clearly than if it were a memory. The cars are stacked and
waiting, their fuel tanks ruptured and drained. Dad waves at a tower of cars
and says, “Luke, cut off those tanks, yeah?” And Luke says, “Sure thing,
Dad.” He lays the torch against his hip and strikes flint. Flames erupt from
nowhere and take him. He screams, fumbles with the twine, screams again,
and takes off through the weeds.
Dad chases him, orders him to stand still. It’s probably the first time in his
whole life that Luke doesn’t do something when Dad is telling him to. Luke
is fast but Dad is smart. He takes a shortcut through a pyramid of cars and
tackles Luke, slamming him to the ground.
I can’t picture what happens next, because nobody ever told me how Dad
put out the fire on Luke’s leg. Then a memory surfaces—of Dad, that night
in the kitchen, wincing as Mother slathers salve on his hands, which are red
and blistering—and I know what he must have done.
Luke is no longer on fire.
I try to imagine the moment of decision. Dad looks at the weeds, which
are burning fast, thirsty for flame in that quivering heat. He looks at his son.
He thinks if he can choke the flames while they’re young, he can prevent a
wildfire, maybe save the house.
Luke seems lucid. His brain hasn’t processed what’s happened; the pain
hasn’t set in. The Lord will provide, I imagine Dad thinking. God left him
conscious.
I imagine Dad praying aloud, his eyes drawn heavenward, as he carries
his son to the truck and sets him in the driver’s seat. Dad shifts the engine
into first, the truck starts its roll. It’s going at a good speed now, Luke is
gripping the wheel. Dad jumps from the moving truck, hits the ground hard
and rolls, then runs back toward the brushfire, which has spread wider and
grown taller. The Lord will provide, he chants, then he takes off his shirt and
begins to beat back the flames.
*
* Since the writing of this story, I have spoken to Luke about the incident. His account differs from
both mine and Richard’s. In Luke’s memory, Dad took Luke to the house, administered a
homeopathic for shock, then put him in a tub of cold water, where he left him to go fight the fire.
This goes against my memory, and against Richard’s. Still, perhaps our memories are in error.
Perhaps I found Luke in a tub, alone, rather than on the grass. What everyone agrees upon,
strangely, is that somehow Luke ended up on the front lawn, his leg in a garbage can.
I wanted to get away from the junkyard and there was only one way to do
that, which was the way Audrey had done it: by getting a job so I wouldn’t
be at the house when Dad rounded up his crew. The trouble was, I was
eleven.
I biked a mile into the dusty center of our little village. There wasn’t
much there, just a church, a post office and a gas station called Papa Jay’s. I
went into the post office. Behind the counter was an older lady whose name
I knew was Myrna Moyle, because Myrna and her husband Jay (Papa Jay)
owned the gas station. Dad said they’d been behind the city ordinance
limiting dog ownership to two dogs per family. They’d proposed other
ordinances, too, and now every Sunday Dad came home from church
shouting about Myrna and Jay Moyle, and how they were from Monterey or
Seattle or wherever and thought they could impose West Coast socialism on
the good people of Idaho.
I asked Myrna if I could put a card up on the board. She asked what the
card was for. I said I hoped I could find jobs babysitting.
“What times are you available?” she said.
“Anytime, all the time.”
“You mean after school?”
“I mean all the time.”
Myrna looked at me and tilted her head. “My daughter Mary needs
someone to tend her youngest. I’ll ask her.”
Mary taught nursing at the school, which Dad said was just about as
brainwashed as a person could get, to be working for the Medical
Establishment and the Government both. I thought maybe he wouldn’t let
me work for her, but he did, and pretty soon I was babysitting Mary’s
daughter every Monday, Wednesday and Friday morning. Then Mary had a
friend, Eve, who needed a babysitter for her three children on Tuesdays and
Thursdays.
A mile down the road, a man named Randy ran a business out of his
home, selling cashews, almonds and macadamias. He stopped by the post
office one afternoon and chatted with Myrna about how tired he was of
packing the boxes himself, how he wished he could hire some kids but they
were all tied up with football and band.
“There’s at least one kid in this town who isn’t,” Myrna said. “And I think
she’d be real eager.” She pointed to my card, and soon I was babysitting
from eight until noon Monday to Friday, then going to Randy’s to pack
cashews until supper. I wasn’t paid much, but as I’d never been paid
anything before, it felt like a lot.
People at church said Mary could play the piano beautifully. They used
the word “professional.” I didn’t know what that meant until one Sunday
when Mary played a piano solo for the congregation. The music stopped my
breath. I’d heard the piano played countless times before, to accompany
hymns, but when Mary played it, the sound was nothing like that formless
clunking. It was liquid, it was air. It was rock one moment and wind the
next.
The next day, when Mary returned from the school, I asked her if instead
of money she would give me lessons. We perched on the piano bench and
she showed me a few finger exercises. Then she asked what else I was
learning besides the piano. Dad had told me what to say when people asked
about my schooling. “I do school every day,” I said.
“Do you meet other kids?” she asked. “Do you have friends?”
“Sure,” I said. Mary returned to the lesson. When we’d finished and I was
ready to go, she said, “My sister Caroline teaches dance every Wednesday in
the back of Papa Jay’s. There are lots of girls your age. You could join.”
That Wednesday, I left Randy’s early and pedaled to the gas station. I
wore jeans, a large gray T-shirt, and steel-toed boots; the other girls wore
black leotards and sheer, shimmering skirts, white tights and tiny ballet
shoes the color of taffy. Caroline was younger than Mary. Her makeup was
flawless and gold hoops flashed through chestnut curls.
She arranged us in rows, then showed us a short routine. A song played
from a boom box in the corner. I’d never heard it before but the other girls
knew it. I looked in the mirror at our reflection, at the twelve girls, sleek and
shiny, pirouetting blurs of black, white and pink. Then at myself, large and
gray.
When the lesson finished, Caroline told me to buy a leotard and dance
shoes.
“I can’t,” I said.
“Oh.” She looked uncomfortable. “Maybe one of the girls can lend you
one.”
She’d misunderstood. She thought I didn’t have money. “It isn’t modest,”
I said. Her lips parted in surprise. These Californian Moyles, I thought.
“Well, you can’t dance in boots,” she said. “I’ll talk to your mother.”
A few days later, Mother drove me forty miles to a small shop whose
shelves were lined with exotic shoes and strange acrylic costumes. Not one
was modest. Mother went straight to the counter and told the attendant we
needed a black leotard, white tights and jazz shoes.
“Keep those in your room,” Mother said as we left the store. She didn’t
need to say anything else. I already understood that I should not show the
leotard to Dad.
That Wednesday, I wore the leotard and tights with my gray T-shirt over
the top. The T-shirt reached almost to my knees, but even so I was ashamed
to see so much of my legs. Dad said a righteous woman never shows
anything above her ankle.
The other girls rarely spoke to me, but I loved being there with them. I
loved the sensation of conformity. Learning to dance felt like learning to
belong. I could memorize the movements and, in doing so, step into their
minds, lunging when they lunged, reaching my arms upward in time with
theirs. Sometimes, when I glanced at the mirror and saw the tangle of our
twirling forms, I couldn’t immediately discern myself in the crowd. It didn’t
matter that I was wearing a gray T-shirt—a goose among swans. We moved
together, a single flock.
We began rehearsals for the Christmas recital, and Caroline called Mother
to discuss the costume. “The skirt will be how long?” Mother said. “And
sheer? No, that’s not going to work.” I heard Caroline say something about
what the other girls in the class would want to wear. “Tara can’t wear that,”
Mother said. “If that’s what the other girls are wearing, she will stay home.”
On the Wednesday after Caroline called Mother, I arrived at Papa Jay’s a
few minutes early. The younger class had just finished, and the store was
flooded with six-year-olds, prancing for their mothers in red velvet hats and
skirts sparkling with sequins of deep scarlet. I watched them wiggle and
leap through the aisles, their thin legs covered only by sheer tights. I thought
they looked like tiny harlots.
The rest of my class arrived. When they saw the outfits, they rushed into
the studio to see what Caroline had for them. Caroline was standing next to
a cardboard box full of large gray sweatshirts. She began handing them out.
“Here are your costumes!” she said. The girls held up their sweatshirts,
eyebrows raised in disbelief. They had expected chiffon or ribbon, not Fruit
of the Loom. Caroline had tried to make the sweatshirts more appealing by
sewing large Santas, bordered with glitter, on the fronts, but this only made
the dingy cotton seem dingier.
Mother hadn’t told Dad about the recital, and neither had I. I didn’t ask
him to come. There was an instinct at work in me, a learned intuition. The
day of the recital, Mother told Dad I had a “thing” that night. Dad asked a
lot of questions, which surprised Mother, and after a few minutes she
admitted it was a dance recital. Dad grimaced when Mother told him I’d
been taking lessons from Caroline Moyle, and I thought he was going to
start talking about California socialism again, but he didn’t. Instead he got
his coat and the three of us walked to the car.
The recital was held at the church. Everyone was there, with flashing
cameras and bulky camcorders. I changed into my costume in the same
room where I attended Sunday school. The other girls chatted cheerfully; I
pulled on my sweatshirt, trying to stretch the material a few more inches. I
was still tugging it downward when we lined up on the stage.
Music played from a stereo on the piano and we began to dance, our feet
tapping in sequence. Next we were supposed to leap, reach upward and spin.
My feet remained planted. Instead of flinging my arms above my head, I
lifted them only to my shoulders. When the other girls crouched to slap the
stage, I tilted; when we were to cartwheel, I swayed, refusing to allow
gravity to do its work, to draw the sweatshirt any higher up my legs.
The music ended. The girls glared at me as we left the stage—I had
ruined the performance—but I could barely see them. Only one person in
that room felt real to me, and that was Dad. I searched the audience and
recognized him easily. He was standing in the back, the lights from the stage
flickering off his square glasses. His expression was stiff, impassive, but I
could see anger in it.
The drive home was only a mile; it felt like a hundred. I sat in the
backseat and listened to my father shout. How could Mother have let me sin
so openly? Was this why she’d kept the recital from him? Mother listened
for a moment, chewing her lip, then threw her hands in the air and said that
she’d had no idea the costume would be so immodest. “I’m furious with
Caroline Moyle!” she said.
I leaned forward to see Mother’s face, wanting her to look at me, to see
the question I was mentally asking her, because I didn’t understand, not at
all. I knew Mother wasn’t furious with Caroline, because I knew Mother
had seen the sweatshirt days before. She had even called Caroline and
thanked her for choosing a costume I could wear. Mother turned her head
toward the window.
I stared at the gray hairs on the back of Dad’s head. He was sitting
quietly, listening to Mother, who continued to insult Caroline, to say how
shocking the costumes were, how obscene. Dad nodded as we bumped up
the icy driveway, becoming less angry with every word from Mother.
The rest of the night was taken up by my father’s lecture. He said
Caroline’s class was one of Satan’s deceptions, like the public school,
because it claimed to be one thing when really it was another. It claimed to
teach dance, but instead it taught immodesty, promiscuity. Satan was
shrewd, Dad said. By calling it “dance,” he had convinced good Mormons to
accept the sight of their daughters jumping about like whores in the Lord’s
house. That fact offended Dad more than anything else: that such a lewd
display had taken place in a church.
After he had worn himself out and gone to bed, I crawled under my
covers and stared into the black. There was a knock at my door. It was
Mother. “I should have known better,” she said. “I should have seen that
class for what it was.”
—
MOTHER MUST HAVE FELT guilty after the recital, because in the weeks that
followed she searched for something else I could do, something Dad
wouldn’t forbid. She’d noticed the hours I spent in my room with Tyler’s old
boom box, listening to the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, so she began looking
for a voice teacher. It took a few weeks to find one, and another few weeks
to persuade the teacher to take me. The lessons were much more expensive
than the dance class had been, but Mother paid for them with the money she
made selling oils.
The teacher was tall and thin, with long fingernails that clicked as they
flew across the piano keys. She straightened my posture by pulling the hair
at the base of my neck until I’d tucked in my chin, then she stretched me out
on the floor and stepped on my stomach to strengthen my diaphragm. She
was obsessed with balance and often slapped my knees to remind me to
stand powerfully, to take up my own space.
After a few lessons, she announced that I was ready to sing in church. It
was arranged, she said. I would sing a hymn in front of the congregation that
Sunday.
The days slipped away quickly, as days do when you’re dreading
something. On Sunday morning, I stood at the pulpit and stared into the
faces of the people below. There was Myrna and Papa Jay, and behind them
Mary and Caroline. They looked sorry for me, like they thought I might
humiliate myself.
Mother played the introduction. The music paused; it was time to sing. I
might have had any number of thoughts at that moment. I might have
thought of my teacher and her techniques—square stance, straight back,
dropped jaw. Instead I thought of Tyler, and of lying on the carpet next to his
desk, staring at his woolen-socked feet while the Mormon Tabernacle Choir
chanted and trilled. He’d filled my head with their voices, which to me were
more beautiful than anything except Buck’s Peak.
Mother’s fingers hovered over the keys. The pause had become awkward;
the congregation shifted uncomfortably. I thought of the voices, of their
strange contradictions—of the way they made sound float on air, of how that
sound was soft like a warm wind, but so sharp it pierced. I reached for those
voices, reached into my mind—and there they were. Nothing had ever felt so
natural; it was as if I thought the sound, and by thinking it brought it into
being. But reality had never yielded to my thoughts before.
The song finished and I returned to our pew. A prayer was offered to close
the service, then the crowd rushed me. Women in floral prints smiled and
clasped my hand, men in square black suits clapped my shoulder. The choir
director invited me to join the choir, Brother Davis asked me to sing for the
Rotary Club, and the bishop—the Mormon equivalent of a pastor—said
he’d like me to sing my song at a funeral. I said yes to all of them.
Dad smiled at everyone. There was scarcely a person in the church that
Dad hadn’t called a gentile—for visiting a doctor or for sending their kids to
the public school—but that day he seemed to forget about California
socialism and the Illuminati. He stood next to me, a hand on my shoulder,
graciously collecting compliments. “We’re very blessed,” he kept saying.
“Very blessed.” Papa Jay crossed the chapel and paused in front of our pew.
He said I sang like one of God’s own angels. Dad looked at him for a
moment, then his eyes began to shine and he shook Papa Jay’s hand like
they were old friends.
I’d never seen this side of my father, but I would see it many times after
—every time I sang. However long he’d worked in the junkyard, he was
never too tired to drive across the valley to hear me. However bitter his
feelings toward socialists like Papa Jay, they were never so bitter that, should
those people praise my voice, Dad wouldn’t put aside the great battle he was
fighting against the Illuminati long enough to say, “Yes, God has blessed us,
we’re very blessed.” It was as if, when I sang, Dad forgot for a moment that
the world was a frightening place, that it would corrupt me, that I should be
kept safe, sheltered, at home. He wanted my voice to be heard.
The theater in town was putting on a play, Annie, and my teacher said that
if the director heard me sing, he would give me the lead. Mother warned me
not to get my hopes up. She said we couldn’t afford to drive the twelve miles
to town four nights a week for rehearsals, and that even if we could, Dad
would never allow me to spend time in town, alone, with who knows what
kind of people.
I practiced the songs anyway because I liked them. One evening, I was in
my room singing, “The sun’ll come out tomorrow,” when Dad came in for
supper. He chewed his meatloaf quietly, and listened.
“I’ll find the money,” he told Mother when they went to bed that night.
“You get her to that audition.”
The summer I sang the lead for Annie it was 1999. My father was in
serious preparedness mode. Not since I was five, and the Weavers were
under siege, had he been so certain that the Days of Abomination were upon
us.
Dad called it Y2K. On January 1, he said, computer systems all over the
world would fail. There would be no electricity, no telephones. All would
sink into chaos, and this would usher in the Second Coming of Christ.
“How do you know the day?” I asked.
Dad said that the Government had programmed the computers with a six digit calendar, which meant the year had only two digits. “When nine-nine
becomes oh-oh,” he said, “the computers won’t know what year it is. They’ll
shut down.”
“Can’t they fix it?”
“Nope, can’t be done,” Dad said. “Man trusted his own strength, and his
strength was weak.”
At church, Dad warned everyone about Y2K. He advised Papa Jay to get
strong locks for his gas station, and maybe some defensive weaponry. “That
store will be the first thing looted in the famine,” Dad said. He told Brother
Mumford that every righteous man should have, at minimum, a ten-year
supply of food, fuel, guns and gold. Brother Mumford just whistled. “We
can’t all be as righteous as you, Gene,” he said. “Some of us are sinners!”
No one listened. They went about their lives in the summer sun.
Meanwhile, my family boiled and skinned peaches, pitted apricots and
churned apples into sauce. Everything was pressure-cooked, sealed, labeled,
and stored away in a root cellar Dad had dug out in the field. The entrance
was concealed by a hillock; Dad said I should never tell anybody where it
was.
One afternoon, Dad climbed into the excavator and dug a pit next to the
old barn. Then, using the loader, he lowered a thousand-gallon tank into the
pit and buried it with a shovel, carefully planting nettles and sow thistle in
the freshly tossed dirt so they would grow and conceal the tank. He whistled
“I Feel Pretty” from West Side Story while he shoveled. His hat was tipped
back on his head, and he wore a brilliant smile. “We’ll be the only ones with
fuel when The End comes,” he said. “We’ll be driving when everyone else is
hotfooting it. We’ll even make a run down to Utah, to fetch Tyler.”
—
I HAD REHEARSALS MOST NIGHTS at the Worm Creek Opera House, a
dilapidated theater near the only stoplight in town. The play was another
world. Nobody talked about Y2K.
The interactions between people at Worm Creek were not at all what I
was used to in my family. Of course I’d spent time with people outside my
family, but they were like us: women who’d hired Mother to midwife their
babies, or who came to her for herbs because they didn’t believe in the
Medical Establishment. I had a single friend, named Jessica. A few years
before, Dad had convinced her parents, Rob and Diane, that public schools
were little more than Government propaganda programs, and since then they
had kept her at home. Before her parents had pulled Jessica from school, she
was one of them, and I never tried to talk to her; but after, she was one of us.
The normal kids stopped including her, and she was left with me.
I’d never learned how to talk to people who weren’t like us—people who
went to school and visited the doctor. Who weren’t preparing, every day, for
the End of the World. Worm Creek was full of these people, people whose
words seemed ripped from another reality. That was how it felt the first time
the director spoke to me, like he was speaking from another dimension. All
he said was, “Go find FDR.” I didn’t move.
He tried again. “President Roosevelt. FDR.”
“Is that like a JCB?” I said. “You need a forklift?”
Everyone laughed.
I’d memorized all my lines, but at rehearsals I sat alone, pretending to
study my black binder. When it was my turn onstage, I would recite my
lines loudly and without hesitation. That made me feel a kind of confidence.
If I didn’t have anything to say, at least Annie did.
A week before opening night, Mother dyed my brown hair cherry red.
The director said it was perfect, that all I needed now was to finish my
costumes before the dress rehearsal on Saturday.
In our basement I found an oversized knit sweater, stained and hole ridden, and an ugly blue dress, which Mother bleached to a faded brown.
The dress was perfect for an orphan, and I was relieved at how easy finding
the costumes had been, until I remembered that in act two Annie wears
beautiful dresses, which Daddy Warbucks buys for her. I didn’t have
anything like that.
I told Mother and her face sank. We drove a hundred miles round-trip,
searching every secondhand shop along the way, but found nothing. Sitting
in the parking lot of the last shop, Mother pursed her lips, then said,
“There’s one more place we can try.”
We drove to my aunt Angie’s and parked in front of the white picket fence
she shared with Grandma. Mother knocked, then stood back from the door
and smoothed her hair. Angie looked surprised to see us—Mother rarely
visited her sister—but she smiled warmly and invited us in. Her front room
reminded me of fancy hotel lobbies from the movies, there was so much silk
and lace. Mother and I sat on a pleated sofa of pale pink while Mother
explained why we’d come. Angie said her daughter had a few dresses that
might do.
Mother waited on the pink sofa while Angie led me upstairs to her
daughter’s room and laid out an armful of dresses, each so fine, with such
intricate lace patterns and delicately tied bows, that at first I was afraid to
touch them. Angie helped me into each one, knotting the sashes, fastening
the buttons, plumping the bows. “You should take this one,” she said,
passing me a navy dress with white braided cords arranged across the
bodice. “Grandma sewed this detailing.” I took the dress, along with another
made of red velvet collared with white lace, and Mother and I drove home.
The play opened a week later. Dad was in the front row. When the
performance ended, he marched right to the box office and bought tickets for
the next night. It was all he talked about that Sunday in church. Not doctors,
or the Illuminati, or Y2K. Just the play over in town, where his youngest
daughter was singing the lead.
Dad didn’t stop me from auditioning for the next play, or the one after
that, even though he worried about me spending so much time away from
home. “There’s no telling what kind of cavorting takes place in that theater,”
he said. “It’s probably a den of adulterers and fornicators.”
When the director of the next play got divorced, it confirmed Dad’s
suspicions. He said he hadn’t kept me out of the public school for all these
years just to see me corrupted on a stage. Then he drove me to the rehearsal.
Nearly every night he said he was going to put a stop to my going, that one
evening he’d just show up at Worm Creek and haul me home. But each time
a play opened he was there, in the front row.
Sometimes he played the part of an agent or manager, correcting my
technique or suggesting songs for my repertoire, even advising me about my
health. That winter I caught a procession of sore throats and couldn’t sing,
and one night Dad called me to him and pried my mouth open to look at my
tonsils.
“They’re swollen, all right,” he said. “Big as apricots.” When Mother
couldn’t get the swelling down with echinacea and calendula, Dad suggested
his own remedy. “People don’t know it, but the sun is the most powerful
medicine we have. That’s why people don’t get sore throats in summer.” He
nodded, as if approving of his own logic, then said, “If I had tonsils like
yours, I’d go outside every morning and stand in the sun with my mouth
open—let those rays seep in for a half hour or so. They’ll shrink in no time.”
He called it a treatment.
I did it for a month.
It was uncomfortable, standing with my jaw dropped and my head tilted
back so the sun could shine into my throat. I never lasted a whole half hour.
My jaw would ache after ten minutes, and I’d half-freeze standing
motionless in the Idaho winter. I kept catching more sore throats, and
anytime Dad noticed I was a bit croaky, he’d say, “Well, what do you
expect? I ain’t seen you getting treatment all week!”
—
IT WAS AT THE Worm Creek Opera House that I first saw him: a boy I didn’t
know, laughing with a group of public school kids, wearing big white shoes,
khaki shorts and a wide grin. He wasn’t in the play, but there wasn’t much
to do in town, and I saw him several more times that week when he turned
up to visit his friends. Then one night, when I was wandering alone in the
dark wings backstage, I turned a corner and found him sitting on the
wooden crate that was a favorite haunt of mine. The crate was isolated—that
was why I liked it.
He shifted to the right, making room for me. I sat slowly, tensely, as if the
seat were made of needles.
“I’m Charles,” he said. There was a pause while he waited for me to give
my name, but I didn’t. “I saw you in the last play,” he said after a moment.
“I wanted to tell you something.” I braced myself, for what I wasn’t sure,
then he said, “I wanted to tell you that your singing is about the best I ever
heard.”
—
I CAME HOME ONE AFTERNOON from packing macadamias to find Dad and
Richard gathered around a large metal box, which they’d hefted onto the
kitchen table. While Mother and I cooked meatloaf, they assembled the
contents. It took more than an hour, and when they’d finished they stood
back, revealing what looked like an enormous military-green telescope, with
its long barrel set firmly atop a short, broad tripod. Richard was so excited
he was hopping from one foot to the other, reciting what it could do. “Got a
range more than a mile! Can bring down a helicopter!”
Dad stood quietly, his eyes shining.
“What is it?” I asked.
“It’s a fifty-caliber rifle,” he said. “Wanna try it?”
I peered through the scope, searching the mountainside, fixing distant
stalks of wheat between its crosshairs.
The meatloaf was forgotten. We charged outside. It was past sunset; the
horizon was dark. I watched as Dad lowered himself to the frozen ground,
positioned his eye at the scope and, after what felt like an hour, pulled the
trigger. The blast was thunderous. I had both palms pressed to my ears, but
after the initial boom I dropped them, listening as the shot echoed through
the ravines. He fired again and again, so that by the time we went inside my
ears were ringing. I could barely hear Dad’s reply when I asked what the
gun was for.
“Defense,” he said.
The next night I had a rehearsal at Worm Creek. I was perched on my
crate, listening to the monologue being performed onstage, when Charles
appeared and sat next to me.
“You don’t go to school,” he said.
It wasn’t a question.
“You should come to choir. You’d like choir.”
“Maybe,” I said, and he smiled. A few of his friends stepped into the
wing and called to him. He stood and said goodbye, and I watched him join
them, taking in the easy way they joked together and imagining an alternate
reality in which I was one of them. I imagined Charles inviting me to his
house, to play a game or watch a movie, and felt a rush of pleasure. But
when I pictured Charles visiting Buck’s Peak, I felt something else,
something like panic. What if he found the root cellar? What if he
discovered the fuel tank? Then I understood, finally, what the rifle was for.
That mighty barrel, with its special range that could reach from the
mountain to the valley, was a defensive perimeter for the house, for our
supplies, because Dad said we would be driving when everyone else was
hotfooting it. We would have food, too, when everyone else was starving,
looting. Again I imagined Charles climbing the hill to our house. But in my
imagination I was on the ridge, and I was watching his approach through
crosshairs.
—
CHRISTMAS WAS SPARSE THAT YEAR. We weren’t poor—Mother’s business was
doing well and Dad was still scrapping—but we’d spent everything on
supplies.
Before Christmas, we continued our preparations as if every action, every
minor addition to our stores might make the difference between surviving,
and not; after Christmas, we waited. “When the hour of need arises,” Dad
said, “the time of preparation has passed.”
The days dragged on, and then it was December 31. Dad was calm at
breakfast but under his tranquillity I sensed excitement, and something like
longing. He’d been waiting for so many years, burying guns and stockpiling
food and warning others to do the same. Everyone at church had read the
prophecies; they knew the Days of Abomination were coming. But still
they’d teased Dad, they’d laughed at him. Tonight he would be vindicated.
After dinner, Dad studied Isaiah for hours. At around ten he closed his
Bible and turned on the TV. The television was new. Aunt Angie’s husband
worked for a satellite-TV company, and he’d offered Dad a deal on a
subscription. No one had believed it when Dad said yes, but in retrospect it
was entirely characteristic for my father to move, in the space of a day, from
no TV or radio to full-blown cable. I sometimes wondered if Dad allowed
the television that year, specifically, because he knew it would all disappear
on January 1. Perhaps he did it to give us a little taste of the world, before it
was swept away.
Dad’s favorite program was The Honeymooners, and that night there was
a special, with episodes playing back to back. We watched, waiting for The
End. I checked the clock every few minutes from ten until eleven, then every
few seconds until midnight. Even Dad, who was rarely stirred by anything
outside himself, glanced often at the clock.
11:59.
I held my breath. One more minute, I thought, before everything is gone.
Then it was 12:00. The TV was still buzzing, its lights dancing across the
carpet. I wondered if our clock was fast. I went to the kitchen and turned on
the tap. We had water. Dad stayed still, his eyes on the screen. I returned to
the couch.
12:05.
How long would it take for the electricity to fail? Was there a reserve
somewhere that was keeping it going these few extra minutes?
The black-and-white specters of Ralph and Alice Kramden argued over a
meatloaf.
12:10.
I waited for the screen to flicker and die. I was trying to take it all in, this
last, luxurious moment—of sharp yellow light, of warm air flowing from the
heater. I was experiencing nostalgia for the life I’d had before, which I
would lose at any second, when the world turned and began to devour itself.
The longer I sat motionless, breathing deeply, trying to inhale the last
scent of the fallen world, the more I resented its continuing solidity.
Nostalgia turned to fatigue.
Sometime after 1:30 I went to bed. I glimpsed Dad as I left, his face
frozen in the dark, the light from the TV leaping across his square glasses.
He sat as if posed, with no agitation, no embarrassment, as if there were a
perfectly mundane explanation for why he was sitting up, alone, at near two
in the morning, watching Ralph and Alice Kramden prepare for a Christmas
party.
He seemed smaller to me than he had that morning. The disappointment
in his features was so childlike, for a moment I wondered how God could
deny him this. He, a faithful servant, who suffered willingly just as Noah
had willingly suffered to build the ark.
But God withheld the flood.
When January 1 dawned like any other morning, it broke Dad’s spirit. He
never again mentioned Y2K. He slipped into despondency, dragging himself
in from the junkyard each night, silent and heavy. He’d sit in front of the TV
for hours, a black cloud hovering.
Mother said it was time for another trip to Arizona. Luke was serving a
mission for the church, so it was just me, Richard and Audrey who piled
into the old Chevy Astro van Dad had fixed up. Dad removed the seats,
except the two in front, and in their place he put a queen mattress; then he
heaved himself onto it and didn’t move for the rest of the drive.
As it had years before, the Arizona sun revived Dad. He lay out on the
porch on the hard cement, soaking it up, while the rest of us read or watched
TV. After a few days he began to improve, and we braced ourselves for the
nightly arguments between him and Grandma. Grandma was seeing a lot of
doctors these days, because she had cancer in her bone marrow.
“Those doctors will just kill you quicker,” Dad said one evening when
Grandma returned from a consultation. Grandma refused to quit
chemotherapy, but she did ask Mother about herbal treatments. Mother had
brought some with her, hoping Grandma would ask, and Grandma tried
them—foot soaks in red clay, cups of bitter parsley tea, tinctures of horsetail
and hydrangea.
“Those herbs won’t do a damned thing,” Dad said. “Herbals operate by
faith. You can’t put your trust in a doctor, then ask the Lord to heal you.”
Grandma didn’t say a word. She just drank her parsley tea.
I remember watching Grandma, searching for signs that her body was
giving way. I didn’t see any. She was the same taut, undefeated woman.
The rest of the trip blurs in my memory, leaving me with only snapshots
—of Mother muscle-testing remedies for Grandma, of Grandma listening
silently to Dad, of Dad sprawled out in the dry heat.
Then I’m in a hammock on the back porch, rocking lazily in the orange
light of the desert sunset, and Audrey appears and says Dad wants us to get
our stuff, we’re leaving. Grandma is incredulous. “After what happened last
time?” she shouts. “You’re going to drive through the night again? What
about the storm?” Dad says we’ll beat the storm. While we load the van
Grandma paces, cussing. She says Dad hasn’t learned a damned thing.
Richard drives the first six hours. I lie in the back on the mattress with
Dad and Audrey.
It’s three in the morning, and we are making our way from southern to
northern Utah, when the weather changes from the dry chill of the desert to
the freezing gales of an alpine winter. Ice claims the road. Snowflakes flick
against the windshield like tiny insects, a few at first, then so many the road
disappears. We push forward into the heart of the storm. The van skids and
jerks. The wind is furious, the view out the window pure white. Richard
pulls over. He says we can’t go any further.
Dad takes the wheel, Richard moves to the passenger seat, and Mother
lies next to me and Audrey on the mattress. Dad pulls onto the highway and
accelerates, rapidly, as if to make a point, until he has doubled Richard’s
speed.
“Shouldn’t we drive slower?” Mother asks.
Dad grins. “I’m not driving faster than our angels can fly.” The van is still
accelerating. To fifty, then to sixty.
Richard sits tensely, his hand clutching the armrest, his knuckles
bleaching each time the tires slip. Mother lies on her side, her face next to
mine, taking small sips of air each time the van fishtails, then holding her
breath as Dad corrects and it snakes back into the lane. She is so rigid, I
think she might shatter. My body tenses with hers; together we brace a
hundred times for impact.
It is a relief when the van finally leaves the road.
—
I AWOKE TO BLACKNESS. Something ice-cold was running down my back.
We’re in a lake! I thought. Something heavy was on top of me. The
mattress. I tried to kick it off but couldn’t, so I crawled beneath it, my hands
and knees pressing into the ceiling of the van, which was upside down. I
came to a broken window. It was full of snow. Then I understood: we were
in a field, not a lake. I crawled through the broken glass and stood,
unsteadily. I couldn’t seem to gain my balance. I looked around but saw no
one. The van was empty. My family was gone.
I circled the wreck twice before I spied Dad’s hunched silhouette on a
hillock in the distance. I called to him, and he called to the others, who were
spread out through the field. Dad waded toward me through the snowdrifts,
and as he stepped into a beam from the broken headlights I saw a six-inch
gash in his forearm and blood slashing into the snow.
I was told later that I’d been unconscious, hidden under the mattress, for
several minutes. They’d shouted my name. When I didn’t answer, they
thought I must have been thrown from the van, through the broken window,
so they’d left to search for me.
Everyone returned to the wreck and stood around it awkwardly, shaking,
either from the cold or from shock. We didn’t look at Dad, didn’t want to
accuse.
The police arrived, then an ambulance. I don’t know who called them. I
didn’t tell them I’d blacked out—I was afraid they’d take me to a hospital. I
just sat in the police car next to Richard, wrapped in a reflective blanket like
the one I had in my “head for the hills” bag. We listened to the radio while
the cops asked Dad why the van wasn’t insured, and why he’d removed the
seats and seatbelts.
We were far from Buck’s Peak, so the cops took us to the nearest police
station. Dad called Tony, but Tony was trucking long-haul. He tried Shawn
next. No answer. We would later learn that Shawn was in jail that night,
having been in some kind of brawl.
Unable to reach his sons, Dad called Rob and Diane Hardy, because
Mother had midwifed five of their eight children. Rob arrived a few hours
later, cackling. “Didn’t you folks damned near kill yerselves last time?”
—
A FEW DAYS AFTER the crash, my neck froze.
I awoke one morning and it wouldn’t move. It didn’t hurt, not at first, but
no matter how hard I concentrated on turning my head, it wouldn’t give
more than an inch. The paralysis spread lower, until it felt like I had a metal
rod running the length of my back and into my skull. When I couldn’t bend
forward or turn my head, the soreness set in. I had a constant, crippling
headache, and I couldn’t stand without holding on to something.
Mother called an energy specialist named Rosie. I was lying on my bed,
where I’d been for two weeks, when she appeared in the doorway, wavy and
distorted, as if I were looking at her through a pool of water. Her voice was
high in pitch, cheerful. It told me to imagine myself, whole and healthy,
protected by a white bubble. Inside the bubble I was to place all the objects I
loved, all the colors that made me feel at peace. I envisioned the bubble; I
imagined myself at its center, able to stand, to run. Behind me was a
Mormon temple, and Kamikaze, Luke’s old goat, long dead. A green glow
lighted everything.
“Imagine the bubble for a few hours every day,” she said, “and you will
heal.” She patted my arm and I heard the door close behind her.
I imagined the bubble every morning, afternoon and night, but my neck
remained immobile. Slowly, over the course of a month, I got used to the
headaches. I learned how to stand, then how to walk. I used my eyes to stay
upright; if I closed them even for a moment, the world would shift and I
would fall. I went back to work—to Randy’s and occasionally to the
junkyard. And every night I fell asleep imagining that green bubble.
—
DURING THE MONTH I was in bed I heard another voice. I remembered it but it
was no longer familiar to me. It had been six years since that impish laugh
had echoed down the hall.
It belonged to my brother Shawn, who’d quarreled with my father at
seventeen and run off to work odd jobs, mostly trucking and welding. He’d
come home because Dad had asked for his help. From my bed, I’d heard
Shawn say that he would only stay until Dad could put together a real crew.
This was just a favor, he said, until Dad could get back on his feet.
It was odd finding him in the house, this brother who was nearly a
stranger to me. People in town seemed to know him better than I did. I’d
heard rumors about him at Worm Creek. People said he was trouble, a bully,
a bad egg, that he was always hunting or being hunted by hooligans from
Utah or even further afield. People said he carried a gun, either concealed
on his body or strapped to his big black motorcycle. Once someone said that
Shawn wasn’t really bad, that he only got into brawls because he had a
reputation for being unbeatable—for knowing all there was to know about
martial arts, for fighting like a man who feels no pain—so every strung-out
wannabe in the valley thought he could make a name for himself by besting
him. It wasn’t Shawn’s fault, really. As I listened to these rumors, he came
alive in my mind as more legend than flesh.
My own memory of Shawn begins in the kitchen, perhaps two months
after the second accident.
I am making corn chowder. The door squeaks and I twist at the waist to
see who’s come in, then twist back to chop an onion.
“You gonna be a walking Popsicle stick forever?” Shawn says.
“Nope.”
“You need a chiropractor,” he says.
“Mom’ll fix it.”
“You need a chiropractor,” he says again.
The family eats, then disperses. I start the dishes. My hands are in the hot,
soapy water when I hear a step behind me and feel thick, callused hands
wrap around my skull. Before I can react, he jerks my head with a swift,
savage motion. CRACK! It’s so loud, I’m sure my head has come off and
he’s holding it. My body folds, I collapse. Everything is black but somehow
spinning. When I open my eyes moments later, his hands are under my arms
and he’s holding me upright.
“Might be a while before you can stand,” he says. “But when you can, I
need to do the other side.”
I was too dizzy, too nauseous, for the effect to be immediate. But
throughout the evening I observed small changes. I could look at the ceiling.
I could cock my head to tease Richard. Seated on the couch, I could turn to
smile at the person next to me.
That person was Shawn, and I was looking at him but I wasn’t seeing
him. I don’t know what I saw—what creature I conjured from that violent,
compassionate act—but I think it was my father, or perhaps my father as I
wished he were, some longed-for defender, some fanciful champion, one
who wouldn’t fling me into a storm, and who, if I was hurt, would make me
whole.
When Grandpa-down-the-hill was a young man, there’d been herds of
livestock spread across the mountain, and they were tended on horseback.
Grandpa’s ranching horses were the stuff of legend. Seasoned as old leather,
they moved their burly bodies delicately, as if guided by the rider’s thoughts.
At least, that’s what I was told. I never saw them. As Grandpa got older
he ranched less and farmed more, until one day he stopped farming. He had
no need for horses, so he sold the ones that had value and set the rest loose.
They multiplied, and by the time I was born there was a whole herd of wild
horses on the mountain.
Richard called them dog-food horses. Once a year, Luke, Richard and I
would help Grandpa round up a dozen or so to take to the auction in town,
where they’d be sold for slaughter. Some years Grandpa would look out over
the small, frightened herd bound for the meat grinder, at the young stallions
pacing, coming to terms with their first captivity, and a hunger would appear
in his eyes. Then he’d point to one and say, “Don’t load that ’un. That ’un
we’ll break.”
But feral horses don’t yield easily, not even to a man like Grandpa. My
brothers and I would spend days, even weeks, earning the horse’s trust, just
so we could touch it. Then we would stroke its long face and gradually, over
more weeks, work our hands around its wide neck and down its muscular
body. After a month of this we’d bring out the saddle, and the horse would
toss its head suddenly and with such violence that the halter would snap or
the rope break. Once a large copper stallion busted the corral fence,
smashed through it as if it weren’t there, and came out the other side bloody
and bruised.
We tried not to name them, these beasts we hoped to tame, but we had to
refer to them somehow. The names we chose were descriptive, not
sentimental: Big Red, Black Mare, White Giant. I was thrown from dozens
of these horses as they bucked, reared, rolled or leapt. I hit the dirt in a
hundred sprawling postures, each time righting myself in an instant and
skittering to the safety of a tree, tractor or fence, in case the horse was
feeling vengeful.
We never triumphed; our strength of will faltered long before theirs. We
got some so they wouldn’t buck when they saw the saddle, and a few who’d
tolerate a human on their back for jaunts around the corral, but not even
Grandpa dared ride them on the mountain. Their natures hadn’t changed.
They were pitiless, powerful avatars from another world. To mount them
was to surrender your footing, to move into their domain. To risk being
borne away.
The first domesticated horse I ever saw was a bay gelding, and it was
standing next to the corral, nibbling sugar cubes from Shawn’s hand. It was
spring, and I was fourteen. It had been many years since I’d touched a horse.
The gelding was mine, a gift from a great-uncle on my mother’s side. I
approached warily, certain that as I moved closer the horse would buck, or
rear, or charge. Instead it sniffed my shirt, leaving a long, wet stain. Shawn
tossed me a cube. The horse smelled the sugar, and the prickles from his
chin tickled my fingers until I opened my palm.
“Wanna break him?” Shawn said.
I did not. I was terrified of horses, or I was terrified of what I thought
horses were—that is, thousand-pound devils whose ambition was to dash
brains against rock. I told Shawn he could break the horse. I would watch
from the fence.
I refused to name the horse, so we called him the Yearling. The Yearling
was already broke to a halter and lead, so Shawn brought out the saddle that
first day. The Yearling pawed the dirt nervously when he saw it; Shawn
moved slowly, letting him smell the stirrups and nibble curiously at the
horn. Then Shawn rubbed the smooth leather across his broad chest, moving
steadily but without hurry.
“Horses don’t like things where they can’t see ’em,” Shawn said. “Best to
get him used to the saddle in front. Then when he’s real comfortable with it,
with the way it smells and feels, we can move it around back.”
An hour later the saddle was cinched. Shawn said it was time to mount,
and I climbed onto the barn roof, sure the corral would descend into
violence. But when Shawn hoisted himself into the saddle, the Yearling
merely skittered. His front hooves raised a few inches off the dirt, as if he’d
pondered rearing but thought better of it, then he dropped his head and his
paws stilled. In the space of a moment, he had accepted our claim to ride
him, to his being ridden. He had accepted the world as it was, in which he
was an owned thing. He had never been feral, so he could not hear the
maddening call of that other world, on the mountain, in which he could not
be owned, could not be ridden.
I named him Bud. Every night for a week I watched Shawn and Bud
gallop through the corral in the gray haze of dusk. Then, on a soft summer
evening, I stood next to Bud, grasping the reins while Shawn held the halter
steady, and stepped into the saddle.
—
SHAWN SAID HE WANTED out of his old life, and that the first step was to stay
away from his friends. Suddenly he was home every evening, looking for
something to do. He began to drive me to my rehearsals at Worm Creek.
When it was just the two of us floating down the highway, he was mellow,
lighthearted. He joked and teased, and he sometimes gave me advice, which
was mostly “Don’t do what I did.” But when we arrived at the theater, he
would change.
At first he watched the younger boys with wary concentration, then he
began to bait them. It wasn’t obvious aggression, just small provocations. He
might flick off a boy’s hat or knock a soda can from his hand and laugh as
the stain spread over the boy’s jeans. If he was challenged—and he usually
wasn’t—he would play the part of the ruffian, a hardened “Whatcha gonna
do about it?” expression disguising his face. But after, when it was just the
two of us, the mask lowered, the bravado peeled off like a breastplate, and
he was my brother.
It was his smile I loved best. His upper canines had never grown in, and
the string of holistic dentists my parents had taken him to as a child had
failed to notice until it was too late. By the time he was twenty-three, and he
got himself to an oral surgeon, they had rotated sideways inside his gums
and were ejecting themselves through the tissue under his nose. The surgeon
who removed them told Shawn to preserve his baby teeth for as long as
possible, then when they rotted out, he’d be given posts. But they never
rotted out. They stayed, stubborn relics of a misplaced childhood, reminding
anyone who witnessed his pointless, endless, feckless belligerence, that this
man was once a boy.
—
IT WAS A HAZY summer evening, a month before I turned fifteen. The sun had
dipped below Buck’s Peak but the sky still held a few hours of light. Shawn
and I were in the corral. After breaking Bud that spring, Shawn had taken up
horses in a serious way. All summer he’d been buying horses,
Thoroughbreds and Paso Finos, most of them unbroken because he could
pick them up cheap. We were still working with Bud. We’d taken him on a
dozen rides through the open pasture, but he was inexperienced, skittish,
unpredictable.
That evening, Shawn saddled a new horse, a copper-coated mare, for the
first time. She was ready for a short ride, Shawn said, so we mounted, him
on the mare, me on Bud. We made it about half a mile up the mountain,
moving deliberately so as not to frighten the horses, winding our way
through the wheat fields. Then I did something foolish. I got too close to the
mare. She didn’t like having the gelding behind her, and with no warning
she leapt forward, thrusting her weight onto her front legs, and with her hind
legs kicked Bud full in the chest.
Bud went berserk.
I’d been tying a knot in my reins to make them more secure and didn’t
have a firm hold. Bud gave a tremendous jolt, then began to buck, throwing
his body in tight circles. The reins flew over his head. I gripped the saddle
horn and squeezed my thighs together, curving my legs around his bulging
belly. Before I could get my bearings, Bud took off at a dead run straight up
a ravine, bucking now and then but running, always running. My foot
slipped through a stirrup up to my calf.
All those summers breaking horses with Grandpa, and the only advice I
remembered him giving was, “Whate’er you do, don’t git your foot caught in
the stirrup.” I didn’t need him to explain. I knew that as long as I came off
clean, I’d likely be fine. At least I’d be on the ground. But if my foot got
caught, I’d be dragged until my head split on a rock.
Shawn couldn’t help me, not on that unbroken mare. Hysteria in one
horse causes hysteria in others, especially in the young and spirited. Of all
Shawn’s horses, there was only one—a seven-year-old buckskin named
Apollo—who might have been old enough, and calm enough, to do it: to
explode in furious speed, a nostril-flapping gallop, then coolly navigate
while the rider detached his body, lifting one leg out of the stirrup and
reaching to the ground to catch the reins of another horse wild with fright.
But Apollo was in the corral, half a mile down the mountain.
My instincts told me to let go of the saddle horn—the only thing keeping
me on the horse. If I let go I’d fall, but I’d have a precious moment to reach
for the flapping reins or try to yank my calf from the stirrup. Make a play
for it, my instincts screamed.
Those instincts were my guardians. They had saved me before, guiding
my movements on a dozen bucking horses, telling me when to cling to the
saddle and when to pitch myself clear of pounding hooves. They were the
same instincts that, years before, had prompted me to hoist myself from the
scrap bin when Dad was dumping it, because they had understood, even if I
had not, that it was better to fall from that great height rather than hope Dad
would intervene. All my life those instincts had been instructing me in this
single doctrine—that the odds are better if you rely only on yourself.
Bud reared, thrusting his head so high I thought he might tumble
backward. He landed hard and bucked. I tightened my grip on the horn,
making a decision, based on another kind of instinct, not to surrender my
hold.
Shawn would catch up, even on that unbroken mare. He’d pull off a
miracle. The mare wouldn’t even understand the command when he
shouted, “Giddy-yap!”; at the jab of his boot in her gut, which she’d never
felt before, she would rear, twisting wildly. But he would yank her head
down, and as soon as her hooves touched the dirt, kick her a second time,
harder, knowing she would rear again. He would do this until she leapt into
a run, then he would drive her forward, welcoming her wild acceleration,
somehow guiding her even though she’d not yet learned the strange dance of
movements that, over time, becomes a kind of language between horse and
rider. All this would happen in seconds, a year of training reduced to a
single, desperate moment.
I knew it was impossible. I knew it even as I imagined it. But I kept hold
of the saddle horn.
Bud had worked himself into a frenzy. He leapt wildly, arching his back
as he shot upward, then tossing his head as he smashed his hooves to the
ground. My eyes could barely unscramble what they saw. Golden wheat flew
in every direction, while the blue sky and the mountain lurched absurdly.
I was so disoriented that I felt, rather than saw, the powerful penny-toned
mare moving into place beside me. Shawn lifted his body from the saddle
and tilted himself toward the ground, holding his reins tightly in one hand
while, with the other, he snatched Bud’s reins from the weeds. The leather
straps pulled taut; the bit forced Bud’s head up and forward. With his head
raised, Bud could no longer buck and he entered a smooth, rhythmic gallop.
Shawn yanked hard on his own reins, pulling the mare’s head toward his
knee, forcing her to run in a circle. He pulled her head tighter on every pass,
wrapping the strap around his forearm, shrinking the circle until it was so
small, the pounding hooves stood still. I slid from the saddle and lay in the
wheat, the itchy stalks poking through my shirt. Above my head the horses
panted, their bellies swelling and collapsing, their hooves pawing at the dirt.
My brother Tony had taken out a loan to buy his own rig—a semi and
trailer—but in order to make the payments, he had to keep the truck on the
road, so that’s where he was living, on the road. Until his wife got sick and
the doctor she consulted (she had consulted a doctor) put her on bed rest.
Tony called Shawn and asked if he could run the rig for a week or two.
Shawn hated trucking long-haul, but he said he’d do it if I came along.
Dad didn’t need me in the junkyard, and Randy could spare me for a few
days, so we set off, heading down to Las Vegas, then east to Albuquerque,
west to Los Angeles, then up to Washington State. I’d thought I would see
the cities, but mostly I saw truck stops and interstate. The windshield was
enormous and elevated like a cockpit, which made the cars below seem like
toys. The sleeper cab, where the bunks were, was musty and dark as a cave,
littered with bags of Doritos and trail mix.
Shawn drove for days with little sleep, navigating our fifty-foot trailer as if
it were his own arm. He doctored the books whenever we crossed a
checkpoint, to make it seem he was getting more sleep than he was. Every
other day we stopped to shower and eat a meal that wasn’t dried fruit and
granola.
Near Albuquerque, the Walmart warehouse was backed up and couldn’t
unload us for two days. We were outside the city—there was nothing but a
truck stop and red sand stretching out in all directions—so we ate Cheetos
and played Mario Kart in the sleeper. By sunset on the second day, our
bodies ached from sitting, and Shawn said he should teach me martial arts.
We had our first lesson at dusk in the parking lot.
“If you know what you’re doing,” he said, “you can incapacitate a man
with minimal effort. You can control someone’s whole body with two
fingers. It’s about knowing where the weak points are, and how to exploit
them.” He grabbed my wrist and folded it, bending my fingers downward so
they reached uncomfortably toward the inside of my forearm. He continued
to add pressure until I twisted slightly, wrapping my arm behind my back to
relieve the strain.
“See? This is a weak point,” he said. “If I fold it any more, you’ll be
immobilized.” He grinned his angel grin. “I won’t, though, because it’d hurt
like hell.”
He let go and said, “Now you try.”
I folded his wrist onto itself and squeezed hard, trying to get his upper
body to collapse the way mine had. He didn’t move.
“Maybe another strategy for you,” he said.
He gripped my wrist a different way—the way an attacker might, he said.
He taught me how to break the hold, where the fingers were weakest and the
bones in my arm strongest, so that after a few minutes I could cut through
even his thick fingers. He taught me how to throw my weight behind a
punch, and where to aim to crush the windpipe.
The next morning, the trailer was unloaded. We climbed into the truck,
picked up a new load and drove for another two days, watching the white
lines disappear hypnotically beneath the hood, which was the color of bone.
We had few forms of entertainment, so we made a game of talking. The
game had only two rules. The first was that every statement had to have at
least two words in which the first letters were switched.
“You’re not my little sister,” Shawn said. “You’re my sittle lister.” He
pronounced the words lazily, blunting the t’s to d’s so that it sounded like
“siddle lister.”
The second rule was that every word that sounded like a number, or like it
had a number in it, had to be changed so that the number was one higher.
The word “to” for example, because it sounds like the number “two,” would
become “three.”
“Siddle Lister,” Shawn might say, “we should pay a-eleven-tion. There’s a
checkpoint ahead and I can’t a-five-d a ticket. Time three put on your
seatbelt.”
When we tired of this, we’d turn on the CB and listen to the lonely banter
of truckers stretched out across the interstate.
“Look out for a green four-wheeler,” a gruff voice said, when we were
somewhere between Sacramento and Portland. “Been picnicking in my
blind spot for a half hour.”
A four-wheeler, Shawn explained, is what big rigs call cars and pickups.
Another voice came over the CB to complain about a red Ferrari that was
weaving through traffic at 120 miles per hour. “Bastard damned near hit a
little blue Chevy,” the deep voice bellowed through the static. “Shit, there’s
kids in that Chevy. Anybody up ahead wanna cool this hothead down?” The
voice gave its location.
Shawn checked the mile marker. We were ahead. “I’m a white Pete
pulling a fridge,” he said. There was silence while everybody checked their
mirrors for a Peterbilt with a reefer. Then a third voice, gruffer than the first,
answered: “I’m the blue KW hauling a dry box.”
“I see you,” Shawn said, and for my benefit pointed to a navy-colored
Kenworth a few cars ahead.
When the Ferrari appeared, multiplied in our many mirrors, Shawn
shifted into high gear, revving the engine and pulling beside the Kenworth
so that the two fifty-foot trailers were running side by side, blocking both
lanes. The Ferrari honked, weaved back and forth, braked, honked again.
“How long should we keep him back there?” the husky voice said, with a
deep laugh.
“Until he calms down,” Shawn answered.
Five miles later, they let him pass.
The trip lasted about a week, then we told Tony to find us a load to Idaho.
“Well, Siddle Lister,” Shawn said when we pulled into the junkyard,
“back three work.”
—
THE WORM CREEK OPERA HOUSE announced a new play: Carousel. Shawn
drove me to the audition, then surprised me by auditioning himself. Charles
was also there, talking to a girl named Sadie, who was seventeen. She
nodded at what Charles was saying, but her eyes were fixed on Shawn.
At the first rehearsal she came and sat next to him, laying her hand on his
arm, laughing and tossing her hair. She was very pretty, with soft, full lips
and large dark eyes, but when I asked Shawn if he liked her, he said he
didn’t.
“She’s got fish eyes,” he said.
“Fish eyes?”
“Yup, fish eyes. They’re dead stupid, fish. They’re beautiful, but their
heads’re as empty as a tire.”
Sadie started dropping by the junkyard around quitting time, usually with
a milkshake for Shawn, or cookies or cake. Shawn hardly even spoke to her,
just grabbed whatever she’d brought him and kept walking toward the
corral. She would follow and try to talk to him while he fussed over his
horses, until one evening she asked if he would teach her to ride. I tried to
explain that our horses weren’t broke all the way, but she was determined, so
Shawn put her on Apollo and the three of us headed up the mountain.
Shawn ignored her and Apollo. He offered none of the help he’d given me,
teaching me how to stand in the stirrups while going down steep ravines or
how to squeeze my thighs when the horse leapt over a branch. Sadie
trembled for the entire ride, but she pretended to be enjoying herself,
restoring her lipsticked smile every time he glanced in her direction.
At the next rehearsal, Charles asked Sadie about a scene, and Shawn saw
them talking. Sadie came over a few minutes later but Shawn wouldn’t speak
to her. He turned his back and she left crying.
“What’s that about?” I said.
“Nothing,” he said.
By the next rehearsal, a few days later, Shawn seemed to have forgotten it.
Sadie approached him warily, but he smiled at her, and a few minutes later
they were talking and laughing. Shawn asked her to cross the street and buy
him a Snickers at the dime store. She seemed pleased that he would ask and
hurried out the door, but when she returned a few minutes later and gave
him the bar, he said, “What is this shit? I asked for a Milky Way.”
“You didn’t,” she said. “You said Snickers.”
“I want a Milky Way.”
Sadie left again and fetched the Milky Way. She handed it to him with a
nervous laugh, and Shawn said, “Where’s my Snickers? What, you forgot
again?”
“You didn’t want it!” she said, her eyes shining like glass. “I gave it to
Charles!”
“Go get it.”
“I’ll buy you another.”
“No,” Shawn said, his eyes cold. His baby teeth, which usually gave him
an impish, playful appearance, now made him seem unpredictable, volatile.
“I want that one. Get it, or don’t come back.”
A tear slid down Sadie’s cheek, smearing her mascara. She paused for a
moment to wipe it away and pull up her smile. Then she walked over to
Charles and, laughing as if it were nothing, asked if she could have the
Snickers. He reached into his pocket and pulled it out, then watched her
walk back to Shawn. Sadie placed the Snickers in his palm like a peace
offering and waited, staring at the carpet. Shawn pulled her onto his lap and
ate the bar in three bites.
“You have lovely eyes,” he said. “Just like a fish.”
—
SADIE’S PARENTS WERE DIVORCING and the town was awash in rumors about
her father. When Mother heard the rumors, she said now it made sense why
Shawn had taken an interest in Sadie. “He’s always protected angels with
broken wings,” she said.
Shawn found out Sadie’s class schedule and memorized it. He made a
point of driving to the high school several times a day, particularly at those
times when he knew she’d be moving between buildings. He’d pull over on
the highway and watch her from a distance, too far for her to come over, but
not so far that she wouldn’t see him. It was something we did together, he
and I, nearly every time we went to town, and sometimes when we didn’t
need to go to town at all. Until one day, when Sadie appeared on the steps of
the high school with Charles. They were laughing together; Sadie hadn’t
noticed Shawn’s truck.
I watched his face harden, then relax. He smiled at me. “I have the perfect
punishment,” he said. “I simply won’t see her. All I have to do is not see her,
and she will suffer.”
He was right. When he didn’t return her calls, Sadie became desperate.
She told the boys at school not to walk with her, for fear Shawn would see,
and when Shawn said he disliked one of her friends, she stopped seeing
them.
Sadie came to our house every day after school, and I watched the
Snickers incident play out over and over, in different forms, with different
objects. Shawn would ask for a glass of water. When Sadie brought it, he’d
want ice. When she brought that he’d ask for milk, then water again, ice, no
ice, then juice. This could go on for thirty minutes before, in a final test, he
would ask for something we didn’t have. Then Sadie would drive to town to
buy it—vanilla ice cream, fries, a burrito—only to have him demand
something else the moment she got back. The nights they went out, I was
grateful.
One night, he came home late and in a strange mood. Everyone was
asleep except me, and I was on the sofa, reading a chapter of scripture
before bed. Shawn plopped down next to me. “Get me a glass of water.”
“You break your leg?” I said.
“Get it, or I won’t drive you to town tomorrow.”
I fetched the water. As I handed it over, I saw the smile on his face and
without thinking dumped the whole thing on his head. I made it down the
hall and was nearly to my room when he caught me.
“Apologize,” he said. Water dripped from his nose onto his T-shirt.
“No.”
He grabbed a fistful of my hair, a large clump, his grip fixed near the root
to give him greater leverage, and dragged me into the bathroom. I groped at
the door, catching hold of the frame, but he lifted me off the ground,
flattened my arms against my body, then dropped my head into the toilet.
“Apologize,” he said again. I said nothing. He stuck my head in further, so
my nose scraped the stained porcelain. I closed my eyes, but the smell
wouldn’t let me forget where I was.
I tried to imagine something else, something that would take me out of
myself, but the image that came to mind was of Sadie, crouching, compliant.
It pumped me full of bile. He held me there, my nose touching the bowl, for
perhaps a minute, then he let me up. The tips of my hair were wet; my scalp
was raw.
I thought it was over. I’d begun to back away when he seized my wrist
and folded it, curling my fingers and palm into a spiral. He continued folding
until my body began to coil, then he added more pressure, so that without
thinking, without realizing, I twisted myself into a dramatic bow, my back
bent, my head nearly touching the floor, my arm behind my back.
In the parking lot, when Shawn had shown me this hold, I’d moved only a
little, responding more to his description than to any physical necessity. It
hadn’t seemed particularly effective at the time, but now I understood the
maneuver for what it was: control. I could scarcely move, scarcely breathe,
without breaking my own wrist. Shawn held me in position with one hand;
the other he dangled loosely at his side, to show me how easy it was.
Still harder than if I were Sadie, I thought.
As if he could read my mind, he twisted my wrist further; my body was
coiled tightly, my face scraping the floor. I’d done all I could do to relieve
the pressure in my wrist. If he kept twisting, it would break.
“Apologize,” he said.
There was a long moment in which fire burned up my arm and into my
brain. “I’m sorry,” I said.
He dropped my wrist and I fell to the floor. I could hear his steps moving
down the hall. I stood and quietly locked the bathroom door, then I stared
into the mirror at the girl clutching her wrist. Her eyes were glassy and
drops slid down her cheeks. I hated her for her weakness, for having a heart
to break. That he could hurt her, that anyone could hurt her like that, was
inexcusable.
I’m only crying from the pain, I told myself. From the pain in my wrist.
Not from anything else.
This moment would define my memory of that night, and of the many
nights like it, for a decade. In it I saw myself as unbreakable, as tender as
stone. At first I merely believed this, until one day it became the truth. Then
I was able to tell myself, without lying, that it didn’t affect me, that he didn’t
affect me, because nothing affected me. I didn’t understand how morbidly
right I was. How I had hollowed myself out. For all my obsessing over the
consequences of that night, I had misunderstood the vital truth: that its not
affecting me, that was its effect.
In September the twin towers fell. I’d never heard of them until they were
gone. Then I watched as planes sank into them, and I stared, bewildered, at
the TV as the unimaginably tall structures swayed, then buckled. Dad stood
next to me. He’d come in from the junkyard to watch. He said nothing. That
evening he read aloud from the Bible, familiar passages from Isaiah, Luke,
and the Book of Revelation, about wars and rumors of wars.
Three days later, when she was nineteen, Audrey was married—to
Benjamin, a blond-haired farm boy she’d met waitressing in town. The
wedding was solemn. Dad had prayed and received a revelation: “There will
be a conflict, a final struggle for the Holy Land,” he’d said. “My sons will be
sent to war. Some of them will not come home.”
I’d been avoiding Shawn since the night in the bathroom. He’d
apologized. He’d come into my room an hour later, his eyes glassy, his voice
croaking, and asked me to forgive him. I’d said that I would, that I already
had. But I hadn’t.
At Audrey’s wedding, seeing my brothers in their suits, those black
uniforms, my rage turned to fear, of some predetermined loss, and I forgave
Shawn. It was easy to forgive: after all, it was the End of the World.
For a month I lived as if holding my breath. Then there was no draft, no
further attacks. The skies didn’t darken, the moon didn’t turn to blood.
There were distant rumblings of war but life on the mountain remained
unchanged. Dad said we should stay vigilant, but by winter my attention had
shifted back to the trifling dramas of my own life.
I was fifteen and I felt it, felt the race I was running with time. My body
was changing, bloating, swelling, stretching, bulging. I wished it would stop,
but it seemed my body was no longer mine. It belonged to itself now, and
cared not at all how I felt about these strange alterations, about whether I
wanted to stop being a child, and become something else.
That something else thrilled and frightened me. I’d always known that I
would grow differently than my brothers, but I’d never thought about what
that might mean. Now it was all I thought about. I began to look for cues to
understand this difference, and once I started looking, I found them
everywhere.
One Sunday afternoon, I helped Mother prepare a roast for dinner. Dad
was kicking off his shoes and loosening his tie. He’d been talking since we
left the church.
“That hemline was three inches above Lori’s knee,” Dad said. “What’s a
woman thinking when she puts on a dress like that?” Mother nodded
absently while chopping a carrot. She was used to this particular lecture.
“And Jeanette Barney,” Dad said. “If a woman wears a blouse that low cut, she ought not bend over.” Mother agreed. I pictured the turquoise
blouse Jeanette had worn that day. The neckline was only an inch below her
collarbone, but it was loose-fitting, and I imagined that if she bent it would
give a full view. As I thought this I felt anxious, because although a tighter
blouse would have made Jeanette’s bending more modest, the tightness itself
would have been less modest. Righteous women do not wear tight clothing.
Other women do that.
I was trying to figure out exactly how much tightness would be the right
amount when Dad said, “Jeanette waited to bend for that hymnal until I was
looking. She wanted me to see.” Mother made a disapproving tsk sound with
her teeth, then quartered a potato.
This speech would stay with me in a way that a hundred of its precursors
had not. I would remember the words very often in the years that followed,
and the more I considered them, the more I worried that I might be growing
into the wrong sort of woman. Sometimes I could scarcely move through a
room, I was so preoccupied with not walking or bending or crouching like
them. But no one had ever taught me the modest way to bend over, so I
knew I was probably doing it the bad way.
—
SHAWN AND I AUDITIONED for a melodrama at Worm Creek. I saw Charles at
the first rehearsal and spent half the evening working up the courage to talk
to him. When I did, finally, he confided in me that he was in love with
Sadie. This wasn’t ideal, but it did give us something to talk about.
Shawn and I drove home together. He sat behind the wheel, glaring at the
road as if it had wronged him.
“I saw you talking to Charles,” he said. “You don’t want people thinking
you’re that kind of girl.”
“The kind that talks?”
“You know what I mean,” he said.
The next night, Shawn came into my room unexpectedly and found me
smudging my eyelashes with Audrey’s old mascara.
“You wear makeup now?” he said.
“I guess.”
He spun around to leave but paused in the doorframe. “I thought you were
better,” he said. “But you’re just like the rest.”
He stopped calling me Siddle Lister. “Let’s go, Fish Eyes!” he shouted
from across the theater one night. Charles looked around curiously. Shawn
began to explain the name, so I started laughing—loud enough, I hoped, to
drown him out. I laughed as if I loved the name.
The first time I wore lip gloss, Shawn said I was a whore. I was in my
bedroom, standing in front of my mirror, trying it out, when Shawn
appeared in the doorway. He said it like a joke but I wiped the color from
my lips anyway. Later that night, at the theater, when I noticed Charles
staring at Sadie, I reapplied it and saw Shawn’s expression twist. The drive
home that night was tense. The temperature outside had fallen well below
zero. I said I was cold and Shawn moved to turn up the heat. Then he
paused, laughed to himself, and rolled all the windows down. The January
wind hit me like a bucket of ice. I tried to roll up my window, but he’d put
on the child lock. I asked him to roll it up. “I’m cold,” I kept saying, “I’m
really, really cold.” He just laughed. He drove all twelve miles like that,
cackling as if it were a game, as if we were both in on it, as if my teeth
weren’t clattering.
I thought things would get better when Shawn dumped Sadie—I suppose
I’d convinced myself that it was her fault, the things he did, and that without
her he would be different. After Sadie, he took up with an old girlfriend,
Erin. She was older, less willing to play his games, and at first it seemed I
was right, that he was doing better.
Then Charles asked Sadie to dinner, Sadie said yes, and Shawn heard
about it. I was working late at Randy’s that night when Shawn turned up,
frothing at the mouth. I left with him, thinking I could calm him, but I
couldn’t. He drove around town for two hours, searching for Charles’s Jeep,
cursing and swearing that when he found that bastard he was “gonna give
him a new face.” I sat in the passenger seat of his truck, listening to the
engine rev as it guzzled diesel, watching the yellow lines disappear beneath
the hood. I thought of my brother as he had been, as I remembered him, as I
wanted to remember him. I thought of Albuquerque and Los Angeles, and
of the miles of lost interstate in between.
A pistol lay on the seat between us, and when he wasn’t shifting gears,
Shawn picked it up and caressed it, sometimes spinning it over his index like
a gunslinger before laying it back on the seat, where light from passing cars
glinted off the steel barrel.
—
I AWOKE WITH NEEDLES in my brain. Thousands of them, biting, blocking out
everything. Then they disappeared for one dizzying moment and I got my
bearings.
It was morning, early; amber sunlight poured in through my bedroom
window. I was standing but not on my own strength. Two hands were
gripping my throat, and they’d been shaking me. The needles, that was my
brain crashing into my skull. I had only a few seconds to wonder why before
the needles returned, shredding my thoughts. My eyes were open but I saw
only white flashes. A few sounds made it through to me.
“SLUT!”
“WHORE!”
Then another sound. Mother. She was crying. “Stop! You’re killing her!
Stop!”
She must have grabbed him because I felt his body twist. I fell to the
floor. When I opened my eyes, Mother and Shawn were facing each other,
Mother wearing only a tattered bathrobe.
I was yanked to my feet. Shawn grasped a fistful of my hair—using the
same method as before, catching the clump near my scalp so he could
maneuver me—and dragged me into the hallway. My head was pressed into
his chest. All I could see were bits of carpet flying past my tripping feet. My
head pounded, I had trouble breathing, but I was starting to understand what
was happening. Then there were tears in my eyes.
From the pain, I thought.
“Now the bitch cries,” Shawn said. “Why? Because someone sees you for
the slut you are?”
I tried to look at him, to search his face for my brother, but he shoved my
head toward the ground and I fell. I scrambled away, then pulled myself
upright. The kitchen was spinning; strange flecks of pink and yellow drifted
before my eyes.
Mother was sobbing, clawing at her hair.
“I see you for what you are,” Shawn said. His eyes were wild. “You
pretend to be saintly and churchish. But I see you. I see how you prance
around with Charles like a prostitute.” He turned to Mother to observe the
effect of his words on her. She had collapsed at the kitchen table.
“She does not,” Mother whispered.
Shawn was still turned toward her. He said she had no idea of the lies I
told, how I’d fooled her, how I played the good girl at home but in town I
was a lying whore. I inched toward the back door.
Mother told me to take her car and go. Shawn turned to me. “You’ll be
needing these,” he said, holding up Mother’s keys.
“She’s not going anywhere until she admits she’s a whore,” Shawn said.
He grabbed my wrist and my body slipped into the familiar posture, head
thrust forward, arm coiled around my lower back, wrist folded absurdly onto
itself. Like a dance step, my muscles remembered and raced to get ahead of
the music. The air poured from my lungs as I tried to bend deeper, to give
my wristbone every possible inch of relief.
“Say it,” he said.
But I was somewhere else. I was in the future. In a few hours, Shawn
would be kneeling by my bed, and he’d be so very sorry. I knew it even as I
hunched there.
“What’s going on?” A man’s voice floated up from the stairwell in the
hall.
I turned my head and saw a face hovering between two wooden railings. It
was Tyler.
I was hallucinating. Tyler never came home. As I thought that, I laughed
out loud, a high-pitched cackle. What kind of lunatic would come back here
once he’d escaped? There were now so many pink and yellow specks in my
vision, it was as if I were inside a snow globe. That was good. It meant I
was close to passing out. I was looking forward to it.
Shawn dropped my wrist and again I fell. I looked up and saw that his
gaze was fixed on the stairwell. Only then did it occur to me that Tyler was
real.
Shawn took a step back. He had waited until Dad and Luke were out of
the house, away on a job, so his physicality could go unchallenged.
Confronting his younger brother—less vicious but powerful in his own way
—was more than he’d bargained for.
“What’s going on?” Tyler repeated. He eyed Shawn, inching forward as if
approaching a rattlesnake.
Mother stopped crying. She was embarrassed. Tyler was an outsider now.
He’d been gone for so long, he’d been shifted to that category of people who
we kept secrets from. Who we kept this from.
Tyler moved up the stairs, advancing on his brother. His face was taut, his
breath shallow, but his expression held no hint of surprise. It seemed to me
that Tyler knew exactly what he was doing, that he had done this before,
when they were younger and less evenly matched. Tyler halted his forward
march but he didn’t blink. He glared at Shawn as if to say, Whatever is
happening here, it’s done.
Shawn began to murmur about my clothes and what I did in town. Tyler
cut him off with a wave of his hand. “I don’t want to know,” he said. Then,
turning to me: “Go, get out of here.”
“She’s not going anywhere,” Shawn repeated, flashing the key ring.
Tyler tossed me his own keys. “Just go,” he said.
I ran to Tyler’s car, which was wedged between Shawn’s truck and the
chicken coop. I tried to back out, but I stomped too hard on the gas and the
tires spun out, sending gravel flying. On my second attempt I succeeded.
The car shot backward and circled around. I shifted into drive and was ready
to shoot down the hill when Tyler appeared on the porch. I lowered the
window. “Don’t go to work,” he said. “He’ll find you there.”
—
THAT NIGHT, WHEN I came home, Shawn was gone. Mother was in the kitchen
blending oils. She said nothing about that morning, and I knew I shouldn’t
mention it. I went to bed, but I was still awake hours later when I heard a
pickup roar up the hill. A few minutes later, my bedroom door creaked
open. I heard the click of the lamp, saw the light leaping over the walls, and
felt his weight drop onto my bed. I turned over and faced him. He’d put a
black velvet box next to me. When I didn’t touch it, he opened the box and
withdrew a string of milky pearls.
He said he could see the path I was going down and it was not good. I was
losing myself, becoming like other girls, frivolous, manipulative, using how
I looked to get things.
I thought about my body, all the ways it had changed. I hardly knew what
I felt toward it: sometimes I did want it to be noticed, to be admired, but
then afterward I’d think of Jeanette Barney, and I’d feel disgusted.
“You’re special, Tara,” Shawn said.
Was I? I wanted to believe I was. Tyler had said I was special once, years
before. He’d read me a passage of scripture from the Book of Mormon,
about a sober child, quick to observe. “This reminds me of you,” Tyler had
said.
The passage described the great prophet Mormon, a fact I’d found
confusing. A woman could never be a prophet, yet here was Tyler, telling me
I reminded him of one of the greatest prophets of all. I still don’t know what
he meant by it, but what I understood at the time was that I could trust
myself: that there was something in me, something like what was in the
prophets, and that it was not male or female, not old or young; a kind of
worth that was inherent and unshakable.
But now, as I gazed at the shadow Shawn cast on my wall, aware of my
maturing body, of its evils and of my desire to do evil with it, the meaning
of that memory shifted. Suddenly that worth felt conditional, like it could be
taken or squandered. It was not inherent; it was bestowed. What was of
worth was not me, but the veneer of constraints and observances that
obscured me.
I looked at my brother. He seemed old in that moment, wise. He knew
about the world. He knew about worldly women, so I asked him to keep me
from becoming one.
“Okay, Fish Eyes,” he said. “I will.”
—
WHEN I AWOKE THE next morning, my neck was bruised and my wrist
swollen. I had a headache—not an ache in my brain but an actual aching of
my brain, as if the organ itself was tender. I went to work but came home
early and lay in a dark corner of the basement, waiting it out. I was lying on
the carpet, feeling the pounding in my brain, when Tyler found me and
folded himself onto the sofa near my head. I was not pleased to see him. The
only thing worse than being dragged through the house by my hair was
Tyler’s having seen it. Given the choice between letting it play out, and
having Tyler there to stop it, I’d have chosen to let it play out. Obviously I
would have chosen that. I’d been close to passing out anyway, and then I
could have forgotten about it. In a day or two it wouldn’t even have been
real. It would become a bad dream, and in a month, a mere echo of a bad
dream. But Tyler had seen it, had made it real.
“Have you thought about leaving?” Tyler asked.
“And go where?”
“School,” he said.
I brightened. “I’m going to enroll in high school in September,” I said.
“Dad won’t like it, but I’m gonna go.” I thought Tyler would be pleased;
instead, he grimaced.
“You’ve said that before.”
“I’m going to.”
“Maybe,” Tyler said. “But as long as you live under Dad’s roof, it’s hard
to go when he asks you not to, easy to delay just one more year, until there
aren’t any years left. If you start as a sophomore, can you even graduate?”
We both knew I couldn’t.
“It’s time to go, Tara,” Tyler said. “The longer you stay, the less likely you
will ever leave.”
“You think I need to leave?”
Tyler didn’t blink, didn’t hesitate. “I think this is the worst possible place
for you.” He’d spoken softly, but it felt as though he’d shouted the words.
“Where could I go?”
“Go where I went,” Tyler said. “Go to college.”
I snorted.
“BYU takes homeschoolers,” he said.
“Is that what we are?” I said. “Homeschoolers?” I tried to remember the
last time I’d read a textbook.
“The admissions board won’t know anything except what we tell them,”
Tyler said. “If we say you were homeschooled, they’ll believe it.”
“I won’t get in.”
“You will,” he said. “Just pass the ACT. One lousy test.”
Tyler stood to go. “There’s a world out there, Tara,” he said. “And it will
look a lot different once Dad is no longer whispering his view of it in your
ear.”
—
THE NEXT DAY I drove to the hardware store in town and bought a slide-bolt
lock for my bedroom door. I dropped it on my bed, then fetched a drill from
the shop and started fitting screws. I thought Shawn was out—his truck
wasn’t in the driveway—but when I turned around with the drill, he was
standing in my doorframe.
“What are you doing?” he said.
“Doorknob’s broke,” I lied. “Door blows open. This lock was cheap but
it’ll do the trick.”
Shawn fingered the thick steel, which I was sure he could tell was not
cheap at all. I stood silently, paralyzed by dread but also by pity. In that
moment I hated him, and I wanted to scream it in his face. I imagined the
way he would crumple, crushed under the weight of my words and his own
self-loathing. Even then I understood the truth of it: that Shawn hated
himself far more than I ever could.
“You’re using the wrong screws,” he said. “You need long ones for the
wall and grabbers for the door. Otherwise, it’ll bust right off.”
We walked to the shop. Shawn shuffled around for a few minutes, then
emerged with a handful of steel screws. We walked back to the house and he
installed the lock, humming to himself and smiling, flashing his baby teeth.
In October Dad won a contract to build industrial granaries in Malad City,
the dusty farm town on the other side of Buck’s Peak. It was a big job for a
small outfit—the crew was just Dad, Shawn, Luke, and Audrey’s husband,
Benjamin—but Shawn was a good foreman, and with him in charge Dad
had acquired a reputation for fast, reliable work.
Shawn wouldn’t let Dad take shortcuts. Half the time I passed the shop,
I’d hear the two of them shouting at each other, Dad saying Shawn was
wasting time, Shawn screaming that Dad had damned near taken someone’s
head off.
Shawn worked long days cleaning, cutting and welding the raw materials
for the granaries, and once construction began he was usually on-site in
Malad. When he and Dad came home, hours after sunset, they were nearly
always cussing. Shawn wanted to professionalize the operation, to invest the
profits from the Malad job in new equipment; Dad wanted things to stay the
same. Shawn said Dad didn’t understand that construction was more
competitive than scrapping, and that if they wanted to land real contracts,
they needed to spend real money on real equipment—specifically, a new
welder and a man lift with a basket.
“We can’t keep using a forklift and an old cheese pallet,” Shawn said. “It
looks like shit, and it’s dangerous besides.”
Dad laughed out loud at the idea of a man basket. He’d been using a
forklift and pallet for twenty years.
—
I WORKED LATE MOST NIGHTS. Randy planned to take a big road trip to find
new accounts, and he’d asked me to manage the business while he was gone.
He taught me how to use his computer to keep the books, process orders,
maintain inventory. It was from Randy that I first heard of the Internet. He
showed me how to get online, how to visit a webpage, how to write an
email. The day he left, he gave me a cellphone so he could reach me at all
hours.
Tyler called one night just as I was getting home from work. He asked if I
was studying for the ACT. “I can’t take the test,” I said. “I don’t know any
math.”
“You’ve got money,” Tyler said. “Buy books and learn it.”
I said nothing. College was irrelevant to me. I knew how my life would
play out: when I was eighteen or nineteen, I would get married. Dad would
give me a corner of the farm, and my husband would put a house on it.
Mother would teach me about herbs, and also about midwifery, which she’d
gone back to now the migraines were less frequent. When I had children,
Mother would deliver them, and one day, I supposed, I would be the
Midwife. I didn’t see where college fit in.
Tyler seemed to read my thoughts. “You know Sister Sears?” he said.
Sister Sears was the church choir director. “How do you think she knows
how to lead a choir?”
I’d always admired Sister Sears, and been jealous of her knowledge of
music. I’d never thought about how she’d learned it.
“She studied,” Tyler said. “Did you know you can get a degree in music?
If you had one, you could give lessons, you could direct the church choir.
Even Dad won’t argue with that, not much anyway.”
Mother had recently purchased a trial version of AOL. I’d only ever used
the Internet at Randy’s, for work, but after Tyler hung up I turned on our
computer and waited for the modem to dial. Tyler had said something about
BYU’s webpage. It only took a few minutes to find it. Then the screen was
full of pictures—of neat brick buildings the color of sunstone surrounded by
emerald trees, of beautiful people walking and laughing, with books tucked
under their arms and backpacks slung over their shoulders. It looked like
something from a movie. A happy movie.
The next day, I drove forty miles to the nearest bookstore and bought a
glossy ACT study guide. I sat on my bed and turned to the mathematics
practice test. I scanned the first page. It wasn’t that I didn’t know how to
solve the equations; I didn’t recognize the symbols. It was the same on the
second page, and the third.
I took the test to Mother. “What’s this?” I asked.
“Math,” she said.
“Then where are the numbers?”
“It’s algebra. The letters stand in for numbers.”
“How do I do it?”
Mother fiddled with a pen and paper for several minutes, but she wasn’t
able to solve any of the first five equations.
The next day I drove the same forty miles, eighty round-trip, and returned
home with a large algebra textbook.
—
EVERY EVENING, AS THE CREW was leaving Malad, Dad would phone the
house so Mother could have dinner waiting when the truck bumped up the
hill. I listened for that call, and when it came I would get in Mother’s car
and drive away. I didn’t know why. I would go to Worm Creek, where I’d sit
in the balcony and watch rehearsals, my feet on the ledge, a math book open
in front of me. I hadn’t studied math since long division, and the concepts
were unfamiliar. I understood the theory of fractions but struggled to
manipulate them, and seeing a decimal on the page made my heart race.
Every night for a month I sat in the opera house, in a chair of red velvet, and
practiced the most basic operations—how to multiply fractions, how to use
a reciprocal, how to add and multiply and divide with decimals—while on
the stage, characters recited their lines.
I began to study trigonometry. There was solace in its strange formulas
and equations. I was drawn to the Pythagorean theorem and its promise of a
universal—the ability to predict the nature of any three points containing a
right angle, anywhere, always. What I knew of physics I had learned in the
junkyard, where the physical world often seemed unstable, capricious. But
here was a principle through which the dimensions of life could be defined,
captured. Perhaps reality was not wholly volatile. Perhaps it could be
explained, predicted. Perhaps it could be made to make sense.
The misery began when I moved beyond the Pythagorean theorem to sine,
cosine and tangent. I couldn’t grasp such abstractions. I could feel the logic
in them, could sense their power to bestow order and symmetry, but I
couldn’t unlock it. They kept their secrets, becoming a kind of gateway
beyond which I believed there was a world of law and reason. But I could
not pass through the gate.
Mother said that if I wanted to learn trigonometry, it was her
responsibility to teach me. She set aside an evening, and the two of us sat at
the kitchen table, scratching at bits of paper and tugging our hair. We spent
three hours on a single problem, and every answer we produced was wrong.
“I wasn’t any good at trig in high school,” Mother moaned, slamming the
book shut. “And I’ve forgotten what little I knew.”
Dad was in the living room, shuffling through blueprints for the granaries
and mumbling to himself. I’d watched him sketch those blueprints, watched
him perform the calculations, altering this angle or lengthening that beam.
Dad had little formal education in mathematics but it was impossible to
doubt his aptitude: somehow I knew that if I put the equation before my
father, he would be able to solve it.
When I’d told Dad that I planned to go to college, he’d said a woman’s
place was in the home, that I should be learning about herbs—“God’s
pharmacy” he’d called it, smiling to himself—so I could take over for
Mother. He’d said a lot more, of course, about how I was whoring after
man’s knowledge instead of God’s, but still I decided to ask him about
trigonometry. Here was a sliver of man’s knowledge I was certain he
possessed.
I scribbled the problem on a fresh sheet of paper. Dad didn’t look up as I
approached, so gently, slowly, I slid the paper over the blueprints. “Dad, can
you solve this?”
He looked at me harshly, then his eyes softened. He rotated the paper,
gazed at it for a moment, and began to scrawl, numbers and circles and
great, arcing lines that doubled back on themselves. His solution didn’t look
like anything in my textbook. It didn’t look like anything I had ever seen.
His mustache twitched; he mumbled. Then he stopped scribbling, looked up
and gave the correct answer.
I asked how he’d solved it. “I don’t know how to solve it,” he said,
handing me the paper. “All I know is, that’s the answer.”
I walked back to the kitchen, comparing the clean, balanced equation to
the mayhem of unfinished computations and dizzying sketches. I was struck
by the strangeness of that page: Dad could command this science, could
decipher its language, decrypt its logic, could bend and twist and squeeze
from it the truth. But as it passed through him, it turned to chaos.
—
I STUDIED TRIGONOMETRY FOR a month. I sometimes dreamed about sine,
cosine and tangent, about mysterious angles and concussed computations,
but for all this I made no real progress. I could not self-teach trigonometry.
But I knew someone who had.
Tyler told me to meet him at our aunt Debbie’s house, because she lived
near Brigham Young University. The drive was three hours. I felt
uncomfortable knocking on my aunt’s door. She was Mother’s sister, and
Tyler had lived with her during his first year at BYU, but that was all I knew
of her.
Tyler answered the door. We settled in the living room while Debbie
prepared a casserole. Tyler solved the equations easily, writing out orderly
explanations for every step. He was studying mechanical engineering, set to
graduate near the top of his class, and soon after would start a PhD at
Purdue. My trig equations were far beneath his abilities, but if he was bored
he didn’t show it; he just explained the principles patiently, over and over.
The gate opened a little, and I peeked through it.
Tyler had gone, and Debbie was pushing a plate of casserole into my
hands, when the phone rang. It was Mother.
“There’s been an accident in Malad,” she said.
—
MOTHER HAD LITTLE INFORMATION. Shawn had fallen. He’d landed on his
head. Someone had called 911, and he’d been airlifted to a hospital in
Pocatello. The doctors weren’t sure if he would live. That was all she knew.
I wanted more, some statement of the odds, even if it was just so I could
reason against them. I wanted her to say, “They think he’ll be fine” or even
“They expect we’ll lose him.” Anything but what she was saying, which
was, “They don’t know.”
Mother said I should come to the hospital. I imagined Shawn on a white
gurney, the life leaking out of him. I felt such a wave of loss that my knees
nearly buckled, but in the next moment I felt something else. Relief.
There was a storm coming, set to lay three feet of snow over Sardine
Canyon, which guarded the entrance to our valley. Mother’s car, which I had
driven to Debbie’s, had bald tires. I told Mother I couldn’t get through.
—
THE STORY OF HOW Shawn fell would come to me in bits and pieces, thin
lines of narrative from Luke and Benjamin, who were there. It was a frigid
afternoon and the wind was fierce, whipping the fine dust up in soft clouds.
Shawn was standing on a wooden pallet, twenty feet in the air. Twelve feet
below him was a half-finished concrete wall, with rebar jutting outward like
blunt skewers. I don’t know for certain what Shawn was doing on the pallet,
but he was probably fitting posts or welding, because that was the kind of
work he did. Dad was driving the forklift.
I’ve heard conflicting accounts of why Shawn fell.
* Someone said Dad
moved the boom unexpectedly and Shawn pitched over the edge. But the
general consensus is that Shawn was standing near the brink, and for no
reason at all stepped backward and lost his footing. He plunged twelve feet,
his body revolving slowly in the air, so that when he struck the concrete wall
with its outcropping of rebar, he hit headfirst, then tumbled the last eight
feet to the dirt.
This is how the fall was described to me, but my mind sketches it
differently—on a white page with evenly spaced lines. He ascends, falls at a
slope, strikes the rebar and returns to the ground. I perceive a triangle. The
event makes sense when I think of it in these terms. Then the logic of the
page yields to my father.
Dad looked Shawn over. Shawn was disoriented. One of his pupils was
dilated and the other wasn’t, but no one knew what that meant. No one
knew it meant there was a bleed inside his brain.
Dad told Shawn to take a break. Luke and Benjamin helped him prop
himself against the pickup, then went back to work.
The facts after this point are even more hazy.
The story I heard was that fifteen minutes later Shawn wandered onto the
site. Dad thought he was ready to work and told him to climb onto the
pallet, and Shawn, who never liked being told what to do, started screaming
at Dad about everything—the equipment, the granary designs, his pay. He
screamed himself hoarse, then just when Dad thought he had calmed down,
he gripped Dad around the waist and flung him like a sack of grain. Before
Dad could scramble to his feet Shawn took off, leaping and howling and
laughing, and Luke and Benjamin, now sure something was very wrong,
chased after him. Luke reached him first but couldn’t hold him; then
Benjamin added his weight and Shawn slowed a little. But it wasn’t until all
three men tackled him—throwing his body to the ground, where, because he
was resisting, his head hit hard—that he finally lay still.
No one has ever described to me what happened when Shawn’s head
struck that second time. Whether he had a seizure, or vomited, or lost
consciousness, I’m not sure. But it was so chilling that someone—maybe
Dad, probably Benjamin—dialed 911, which no member of my family had
ever done before.
They were told a helicopter would arrive in minutes. Later the doctors
would speculate that when Dad, Luke and Benjamin had wrestled Shawn to
the ground—and he’d sustained a concussion—he was already in critical
condition. They said it was a miracle he hadn’t died the moment his head hit
the ground.
I struggle to imagine the scene while they waited for the chopper. Dad
said that when the paramedics arrived, Shawn was sobbing, begging for
Mother. By the time he reached the hospital, his state of mind had shifted.
He stood naked on the gurney, eyes bulging, bloodshot, screaming that he
would rip out the eyes of the next bastard who came near him. Then he
collapsed into sobs and finally lost consciousness.
—
SHAWN LIVED THROUGH THE NIGHT.
In the morning I drove to Buck’s Peak. I couldn’t explain why I wasn’t
rushing to my brother’s bedside. I told Mother I had to work.
“He’s asking for you,” she said.
“You said he doesn’t recognize anyone.”
“He doesn’t,” she said. “But the nurse just asked me if he knows someone
named Tara. He said your name over and over this morning, when he was
asleep and when he was awake. I told them Tara is his sister, and now
they’re saying it would be good if you came. He might recognize you, and
that would be something. Yours is the only name he’s said since he got to
the hospital.”
I was silent.
“I’ll pay for the gas,” Mother said. She thought I wouldn’t come because
of the thirty dollars it would cost in fuel. I was embarrassed that she thought
that, but then, if it wasn’t the money, I had no reason at all.
“I’m leaving now,” I said.
I remember strangely little of the hospital, or of how my brother looked. I
vaguely recall that his head was wrapped in gauze, and that when I asked
why, Mother said the doctors had performed a surgery, cutting into his skull
to relieve some pressure, or stop a bleed, or repair something—actually, I
can’t remember what she said. Shawn was tossing and turning like a child
with a fever. I sat with him for an hour. A few times his eyes opened, but if
he was conscious, he didn’t recognize me.
When I came the next day, he was awake. I walked into the room and he
blinked and looked at Mother, as if to check that she was seeing me, too.
“You came,” he said. “I didn’t think you would.” He took my hand and
then fell asleep.
I stared at his face, at the bandages wrapped around his forehead and over
his ears, and was bled of my bitterness. Then I understood why I hadn’t
come sooner. I’d been afraid of how I would feel, afraid that if he died, I
might be glad.
I’m sure the doctors wanted to keep him in the hospital, but we didn’t
have insurance, and the bill was already so large that Shawn would be
making payments a decade later. The moment he was stable enough to
travel, we took him home.
He lived on the sofa in the front room for two months. He was physically
weak—it was all he had in him to make it to the bathroom and back. He’d
lost his hearing completely in one ear and had trouble hearing with the
other, so he often turned his head when people spoke to him, orienting his
better ear toward them, rather than his eyes. Except for this strange
movement and the bandages from the surgery, he looked normal, no
swelling, no bruises. According to the doctors, this was because the damage
was very serious: a lack of external injuries meant the damage was all
internal.
It took some time for me to realize that although Shawn looked the same,
he wasn’t. He seemed lucid, but if you listened carefully his stories didn’t
make sense. They weren’t really stories at all, just one tangent after another.
I felt guilty that I hadn’t visited him immediately in the hospital, so to
make it up to him I quit my job and tended him day and night. When he
wanted water, I fetched it; if he was hungry, I cooked.
Sadie started coming around, and Shawn welcomed her. I looked forward
to her visits because they gave me time to study. Mother thought it was
important that I stay with Shawn, so no one interrupted me. For the first
time in my life I had long stretches in which to learn—without having to
scrap, or strain tinctures, or check inventory for Randy. I examined Tyler’s
notes, read and reread his careful explanations. After a few weeks of this, by
magic or miracle, the concepts took hold. I retook the practice test. The
advanced algebra was still indecipherable—it came from a world beyond my
ability to perceive—but the trigonometry had become intelligible, messages
written in a language I could understand, from a world of logic and order
that only existed in black ink and on white paper.
The real world, meanwhile, plunged into chaos. The doctors told Mother
that Shawn’s injury might have altered his personality—that in the hospital,
he had shown tendencies toward volatility, even violence, and that such
changes might be permanent.
He did succumb to rages, moments of blind anger when all he wanted was
to hurt someone. He had an intuition for nastiness, for saying the single
most devastating thing, that left Mother in tears more nights than not. These
rages changed, and worsened, as his physical strength improved, and I found
myself cleaning the toilet every morning, knowing my head might be inside
it before lunch. Mother said I was the only one who could calm him, and I
persuaded myself that that was true. Who better? I thought. He doesn’t affect
me.
Reflecting on it now, I’m not sure the injury changed him that much, but I
convinced myself that it had, and that any cruelty on his part was entirely
new. I can read my journals from this period and trace the evolution—of a
young girl rewriting her history. In the reality she constructed for herself
nothing had been wrong before her brother fell off that pallet. I wish I had
my best friend back, she wrote. Before his injury, I never got hurt at all.
* My account of Shawn’s fall is based on the story as it was told to me at the time. Tyler was told the
same story; in fact, many of the details in this account come from his memory. Asked fifteen years
later, others remember it differently. Mother says Shawn was not standing on a pallet, only on
forklift tines. Luke remembers the pallet, but substitutes a metal drain, with the grating removed, in
place of the rebar. He says the fall was twelve feet, and that Shawn began acting strangely as soon as
he regained consciousness. Luke has no memory of who dialed 911, but says there were men
working in a nearby mill, and he suspects that one of them called immediately after Shawn fell.
There was a moment that winter. I was kneeling on the carpet, listening to
Dad testify of Mother’s calling as a healer, when my breath caught in my
chest and I felt taken out of myself. I no longer saw my parents or our living
room. What I saw was a woman grown, with her own mind, her own
prayers, who no longer sat, childlike, at her father’s feet.
I saw the woman’s swollen belly and it was my belly. Next to her sat her
mother, the midwife. She took her mother’s hand and said she wanted the
baby delivered in a hospital, by a doctor. I’ll drive you, her mother said. The
women moved toward the door, but the door was blocked—by loyalty, by
obedience. By her father. He stood, immovable. But the woman was his
daughter, and she had drawn to herself all his conviction, all his weightiness.
She set him aside and moved through the door.
I tried to imagine what future such a woman might claim for herself. I
tried to conjure other scenes in which she and her father were of two minds.
When she ignored his counsel and kept her own. But my father had taught
me that there are not two reasonable opinions to be had on any subject: there
is Truth and there are Lies. I knelt on the carpet, listening to my father but
studying this stranger, and felt suspended between them, drawn to each,
repelled by both. I understood that no future could hold them; no destiny
could tolerate him and her. I would remain a child, in perpetuity, always, or
I would lose him.
—
I WAS LYING ON MY BED, watching the shadows my feeble lamp cast on the
ceiling, when I heard my father’s voice at the door. Instinctively I jerked to
my feet in a kind of salute, but once I was standing I wasn’t sure what to do.
There was no precedent for this: my father had never visited my room
before.
He strode past me and sat on my bed, then patted the mattress next to
him. I took my seat, nervously, my feet barely touching the floor. I waited for
him to speak, but the moments passed silently. His eyes were closed, his jaw
slackened, as if he were listening to seraphic voices. “I’ve been praying,” he
said. His voice was soft, a loving voice. “I’ve been praying about your
decision to go to college.”
His eyes opened. His pupils had dilated in the lamplight, absorbing the
hazel of the iris. I’d never seen eyes so given over to blackness; they seemed
unearthly, tokens of spiritual power.
“The Lord has called me to testify,” he said. “He is displeased. You have
cast aside His blessings to whore after man’s knowledge. His wrath is stirred
against you. It will not be long in coming.”
I don’t remember my father standing to leave but he must have, while I
sat, gripped by fear. God’s wrath had laid waste to cities, it had flooded the
whole earth. I felt weak, then wholly powerless. I remembered that my life
was not mine. I could be taken out of my body at any moment, dragged
heavenward to reckon with a furious Father.
The next morning I found Mother mixing oils in the kitchen. “I’ve
decided not to go to BYU,” I said.
She looked up, fixing her eyes on the wall behind me, and whispered,
“Don’t say that. I don’t want to hear that.”
I didn’t understand. I’d thought she would be glad to see me yield to God.
Her gaze shifted to me. I hadn’t felt its strength in years and I was stunned
by it. “Of all my children,” she said, “you were the one I thought would
burst out of here in a blaze. I didn’t expect it from Tyler—that was a
surprise—but you. Don’t you stay. Go. Don’t let anything stop you from
going.”
I heard Dad’s step on the stairwell. Mother sighed and her eyes fluttered,
as if she were coming out of a trance.
Dad took his seat at the kitchen table and Mother stood to fix his
breakfast. He began a lecture about liberal professors, and Mother mixed
batter for pancakes, periodically murmuring in agreement.
—
WITHOUT SHAWN AS FOREMAN, Dad’s construction business dwindled. I’d
quit my job at Randy’s to look after Shawn. Now I needed money, so when
Dad went back to scrapping that winter, so did I.
It was an icy morning, much like the first, when I returned to the
junkyard. It had changed. There were still pillars of mangled cars but they
no longer dominated the landscape. A few years before, Dad had been hired
by Utah Power to dismantle hundreds of utility towers. He had been allowed
to keep the angle iron, and it was now stacked—four hundred thousand
pounds of it—in tangled mountains all over the yard.
I woke up every morning at six to study—because it was easier to focus in
the mornings, before I was worn out from scrapping. Although I was still
fearful of God’s wrath, I reasoned with myself that my passing the ACT was
so unlikely, it would take an act of God. And if God acted, then surely my
going to school was His will.
The ACT was composed of four sections: math, English, science and
reading. My math skills were improving but they were not strong. While I
could answer most of the questions on the practice exam, I was slow,
needing double or triple the allotted time. I lacked even a basic knowledge
of grammar, though I was learning, beginning with nouns and moving on to
prepositions and gerunds. Science was a mystery, perhaps because the only
science book I’d ever read had had detachable pages for coloring. Of the
four sections, reading was the only one about which I felt confident.
BYU was a competitive school. I’d need a high score—a twenty-seven at
least, which meant the top fifteen percent of my cohort. I was sixteen, had
never taken an exam, and had only recently undertaken anything like a
systematic education; still I registered for the test. It felt like throwing dice,
like the roll was out of my hands. God would score the toss.
I didn’t sleep the night before. My brain conjured so many scenes of
disaster, it burned as if with a fever. At five I got out of bed, ate breakfast,
and drove the forty miles to Utah State University. I was led into a white
classroom with thirty other students, who took their seats and placed their
pencils on their desks. A middle-aged woman handed out tests and strange
pink sheets I’d never seen before.
“Excuse me,” I said when she gave me mine. “What is this?”
“It’s a bubble sheet. To mark your answers.”
“How does it work?” I said.
“It’s the same as any other bubble sheet.” She began to move away from
me, visibly irritated, as if I were playing a prank.
“I’ve never used one before.”
She appraised me for a moment. “Fill in the bubble of the correct
answer,” she said. “Blacken it completely. Understand?”
The test began. I’d never sat at a desk for four hours in a room full of
people. The noise was unbelievable, yet I seemed to be the only person who
heard it, who couldn’t divert her attention from the rustle of turning pages
and the scratch of pencils on paper.
When it was over I suspected that I’d failed the math, and I was positive
that I’d failed the science. My answers for the science portion couldn’t even
be called guesses. They were random, just patterns of dots on that strange
pink sheet.
I drove home. I felt stupid, but more than stupid I felt ridiculous. Now that
I’d seen the other students—watched them march into the classroom in neat
rows, claim their seats and calmly fill in their answers, as if they were
performing a practiced routine—it seemed absurd that I had thought I could
score in the top fifteen percent.
That was their world. I stepped into overalls and returned to mine.
—
THERE WAS AN UNUSUALLY hot day that spring, and Luke and I spent it
hauling purlins—the iron beams that run horizontally along the length of a
roof. The purlins were heavy and the sun relentless. Sweat dripped from our
noses and onto the painted iron. Luke slipped out of his shirt, grabbed hold
of the sleeves and tore them, leaving huge gashes a breeze could pass
through. I wouldn’t have dreamed of doing anything so radical, but after the
twentieth purlin my back was sticky with sweat, and I flapped my T-shirt to
make a fan, then rolled up my sleeves until an inch of my shoulders was
visible. When Dad saw me a few minutes later, he strode over and yanked
the sleeves down. “This ain’t a whorehouse,” he said.
I watched him walk away and, mechanically, as if I weren’t making the
decision, rerolled them. He returned an hour later, and when he caught sight
of me he paused mid-step, confused. He’d told me what to do, and I hadn’t
done it. He stood uncertainly for a moment, then crossed over to me, took
hold of both sleeves and jerked them down. He didn’t make it ten steps
before I’d rolled them up again.
I wanted to obey. I meant to. But the afternoon was so hot, the breeze on
my arms so welcome. It was just a few inches. I was covered from my
temples to my toes in grime. It would take me half an hour that night to dig
the black dirt out of my nostrils and ears. I didn’t feel much like an object of
desire or temptation. I felt like a human forklift. How could an inch of skin
matter?
—
I WAS HOARDING MY PAYCHECKS, in case I needed the money for tuition. Dad
noticed and started charging me for small things. Mother had gone back to
buying insurance after the second car accident, and Dad said I should pay
my share. So I did. Then he wanted more, for registration. “These
Government fees will break you,” he said as I handed him the cash.
That satisfied Dad until my test results arrived. I returned from the
junkyard to find a white envelope. I tore it open, staining the page with
grease, and looked past the individual scores to the composite. Twenty-two.
My heart was beating loud, happy beats. It wasn’t a twenty-seven, but it
opened up possibilities. Maybe Idaho State.
I showed Mother the score and she told Dad. He became agitated, then he
shouted that it was time I moved out.
“If she’s old enough to pull a paycheck, she’s old enough to pay rent,”
Dad yelled. “And she can pay it somewhere else.” At first Mother argued
with him, but within minutes he’d convinced her.
I’d been standing in the kitchen, weighing my options, thinking about
how I’d just given Dad four hundred dollars, a third of my savings, when
Mother turned to me and said, “Do you think you could move out by
Friday?”
Something broke in me, a dam or a levee. I felt tossed about, unable to
hold myself in place. I screamed but the screams were strangled; I was
drowning. I had nowhere to go. I couldn’t afford to rent an apartment, and
even if I could the only apartments for rent were in town. Then I’d need a
car. I had only eight hundred dollars. I sputtered all this at Mother, then ran
to my room and slammed the door.
She knocked moments later. “I know you think we’re being unfair,” she
said, “but when I was your age I was living on my own, getting ready to
marry your father.”
“You were married at sixteen?” I said.
“Don’t be silly,” she said. “You are not sixteen.”
I stared at her. She stared at me. “Yes, I am. I’m sixteen.”
She looked me over. “You’re at least twenty.” She cocked her head.
“Aren’t you?”
We were silent. My heart pounded in my chest. “I turned sixteen in
September,” I said.
“Oh.” Mother bit her lip, then she stood and smiled. “Well, don’t worry
about it then. You can stay. Don’t know what your dad was thinking, really. I
guess we forgot. Hard to keep track of how old you kids are.”
—
SHAWN RETURNED TO WORK, hobbling unsteadily. He wore an Aussie outback
hat, which was large, wide-brimmed, and made of chocolate-brown oiled
leather. Before the accident, he had worn the hat only when riding horses,
but now he kept it on all the time, even in the house, which Dad said was
disrespectful. Disrespecting Dad might have been the reason Shawn wore it,
but I suspect another reason was that it was large and comfortable and
covered the scars from his surgery.
He worked short days at first. Dad had a contract to build a milking barn
in Oneida County, about twenty miles from Buck’s Peak, so Shawn puttered
around the yard, adjusting schematics and measuring I-beams.
Luke, Benjamin and I were scrapping. Dad had decided it was time to
salvage the angle iron stacked all around the farm. To be sold, each piece
had to measure less than four feet. Shawn suggested we use torches to cut
the iron, but Dad said it would be too slow and cost too much in fuel.
A few days later Dad came home with the most frightening machine I’ve
ever seen. He called it the Shear. At first glance it appeared to be a three-ton
pair of scissors, and this turned out to be exactly what it was. The blades
were made of dense iron, twelve inches thick and five feet across. They cut
not by sharpness but by force and mass. They bit down, their great jaws
propelled by a heavy piston attached to a large iron wheel. The wheel was
animated by a belt and motor, which meant that if something got caught in
the machine, it would take anywhere from thirty seconds to a minute to stop
the wheel and halt the blades. Up and down they roared, louder than a
passing train as they chewed through iron as thick as a man’s arm. The iron
wasn’t being cut so much as snapped. Sometimes it would buck, propelling
whoever was holding it toward the dull, chomping blades.
Dad had dreamed up many dangerous schemes over the years, but this
was the first that really shocked me. Perhaps it was the obvious lethality of
it, the certainty that a wrong move would cost a limb. Or maybe that it was
utterly unnecessary. It was indulgent. Like a toy, if a toy could take your
head off.
Shawn called it a death machine and said Dad had lost what little sense
he’d ever had. “Are you trying to kill someone?” he said. “Because I got a
gun in my truck that will make a lot less mess.” Dad couldn’t suppress his
grin. I’d never seen him so enraptured.
Shawn lurched back to the shop, shaking his head. Dad began feeding
iron through the Shear. Each length bucked him forward and twice he nearly
pitched headfirst into the blades. I jammed my eyes shut, knowing that if
Dad’s head got caught, the blades wouldn’t even slow, just hack through his
neck and keep chomping.
Now that he was sure the machine worked, Dad motioned for Luke to
take over, and Luke, ever eager to please, stepped forward. Five minutes
later Luke’s arm was gashed to the bone and he was running toward the
house, blood spurting.
Dad scanned his crew. He motioned to Benjamin, but Benjamin shook his
head, saying he liked his fingers attached, thanks anyway. Dad looked
longingly at the house, and I imagined him wondering how long it would
take Mother to stop the bleeding. Then his eyes settled on me.
“Come here, Tara.”
I didn’t move.
“Get over here,” he said.
I stepped forward slowly, not blinking, watching the Shear as if it might
attack. Luke’s blood was still on the blade. Dad picked up a six-foot length
of angle iron and handed me the end. “Keep a good hold on it,” he said.
“But if it bucks, let go.”
The blades chomped, growling as they snapped up and down—a warning,
I thought, like a dog’s snarl, to get the hell away. But Dad’s mania for the
machine had carried him beyond the reach of reason.
“It’s easy,” he said.
I prayed when I fed the first piece to the blades. Not to avoid injury—
there was no possibility of that—but that the injury would be like Luke’s, a
wedge of flesh, so I could go to the house, too. I chose smaller pieces,
hoping my weight could control the lurch. Then I ran out of small pieces. I
picked up the smallest of what was left, but the metal was still thick. I
shoved it through and waited for the jaws to crash shut. The sound of solid
iron fracturing was thunderous. The iron bucked, tossing me forward so
both my feet left the ground. I let go and collapsed in the dirt, and the iron,
now free, and being chewed violently by the blades, launched into the air
then crashed down next to me.
“WHAT THE HELL IS GOING ON?” Shawn appeared in the corner of
my vision. He strode over and pulled me to my feet, then spun around to
face Dad.
“Five minutes ago, this monster nearly ripped Luke’s arm off! So you’ve
put Tara on it?”
“She’s made of strong stuff,” Dad said, winking at me.
Shawn’s eyes bulged. He was supposed to be taking it easy, but he looked
apoplectic.
“It’s going to take her head off!” he screamed. He turned to me and waved
toward the ironworker in the shop. “Go make clips to fit those purlins. I
don’t want you coming near this thing again.”
Dad moved forward. “This is my crew. You work for me and so does Tara.
I told her to run the Shear, and she will run it.”
They shouted at each other for fifteen minutes. It was different from the
fights they’d had before—this was unrestrained somehow, hateful. I’d never
seen anyone yell at my father like that, and I was astonished by, then afraid
of, the change it wrought in his features. His face transformed, becoming
rigid, desperate. Shawn had awoken something in Dad, some primal need.
Dad could not lose this argument and save face. If I didn’t run the Shear,
Dad would no longer be Dad.
Shawn leapt forward and shoved Dad hard in the chest. Dad stumbled
backward, tripped and fell. He lay in the mud, shocked, for a moment, then
he climbed to his feet and lunged toward his son. Shawn raised his arms to
block the punch, but when Dad saw this he lowered his fists, perhaps
remembering that Shawn had only recently regained the ability to walk.
“I told her to do it, and she will do it,” Dad said, low and angry. “Or she
won’t live under my roof.”
Shawn looked at me. For a moment, he seemed to consider helping me
pack—after all, he had run away from Dad at my age—but I shook my head.
I wasn’t leaving, not like that. I would work the Shear first, and Shawn knew
it. He looked at the Shear, then at the pile next to it, about fifty thousand
pounds of iron. “She’ll do it,” he said.
Dad seemed to grow five inches. Shawn bent unsteadily and lifted a piece
of heavy iron, then heaved it toward the Shear.
“Don’t be stupid,” Dad said.
“If she’s doing it, I’m doing it,” Shawn said. The fight had left his voice.
I’d never seen Shawn give way to Dad, not once, but he’d decided to lose
this argument. He understood that if he didn’t submit, I surely would.
“You’re my foreman!” Dad shouted. “I need you in Oneida, not mucking
with scrap!”
“Then shut down the Shear.”
Dad walked away cursing, exasperated, but probably thinking that Shawn
would get tired and go back to being foreman before supper. Shawn watched
Dad leave, then he turned to me and said, “Okay, Siddle Liss. You bring the
pieces and I’ll feed them through. If the iron is thick, say a half inch, I’ll
need your weight on the back to keep me from getting tossed into the blades.
Okay?”
Shawn and I ran the Shear for a month. Dad was too stubborn to shut it
down, even though it cost him more to have his foreman salvaging than it
would have cost him to cut the iron with torches. When we finished, I had
some bruises but I wasn’t hurt. Shawn seemed bled of life. It had only been
a few months since his fall from the pallet, and his body couldn’t take the
wear. He was cracked in the head many times when a length of iron bucked
at an unexpected angle. When that happened he’d sit for a minute in the dirt,
his hands over his eyes, then he’d stand and reach for the next length. In the
evenings he lay on the kitchen floor in his stained shirt and dusty jeans, too
weary even to shower.
I fetched all the food and water he asked for. Sadie came most evenings,
and the two of us would run side by side when he sent us for ice, then to
remove the ice, then to put the ice back in. We were both Fish Eyes.
The next morning Shawn and I would return to the Shear, and he would
feed iron through its jaws, which chewed with such force that it pulled him
off his feet, easily, playfully, as if it were a game, as if he were a child.
Construction began on the milking barn in Oneida. Shawn designed and
welded the main frame—the massive beams that formed the skeleton of the
building. They were too heavy for the loader; only a crane could lift them. It
was a delicate procedure, requiring the welders to balance on opposite ends
of a beam while it was lowered onto columns, then welded in place. Shawn
surprised everyone when he announced that he wanted me to operate the
crane.
“Tara can’t drive the crane,” Dad said. “It’ll take half the morning to teach
her the controls, and she still won’t know what the hell she’s doing.”
“But she’ll be careful,” Shawn said, “and I’m done falling off shit.”
An hour later I was in the man box, and Shawn and Luke were standing
on either end of a beam, twenty feet in the air. I brushed the lever lightly,
listening as the hydraulic cylinders hissed softly to protract. “Hold!” Shawn
shouted when the beam was in place, then they nodded their helmets down
and began to weld.
My operating the crane was one of a hundred disputes between Dad and
Shawn that Shawn won that summer. Most were not resolved so peacefully.
They argued nearly every day—about a flaw in the schematics or a tool that
had been left at home. Dad seemed eager to fight, to prove who was in
charge.
One afternoon Dad walked over and stood right next to Shawn, watching
him weld. A minute later, for no reason, he started shouting: that Shawn had
taken too long at lunch, that he wasn’t getting the crew up early enough or
working us hard enough. Dad yelled for several minutes, then Shawn took
off his welding helmet, looked at him calmly and said, “You gonna shut up
so I can work?”
Dad kept yelling. He said Shawn was lazy, that he didn’t know how to run
a crew, didn’t understand the value of hard work. Shawn stepped down from
his welding and ambled over to the flatbed pickup. Dad followed, still
hollering. Shawn pulled off his gloves, slowly, delicately, one finger at a
time, as if there weren’t a man screaming six inches from his face. For
several moments he stood still, letting the abuse wash over him, then he
stepped into the pickup and drove off, leaving Dad to shout at the dust.
I remember the awe I felt as I watched that pickup roll down the dirt road.
Shawn was the only person I had ever seen stand up to Dad, the only one
whose force of mind, whose sheer tonnage of conviction, could make Dad
give way. I had seen Dad lose his temper and shout at every one of my
brothers. Shawn was the only one I ever saw walk away.
—
IT WAS A SATURDAY NIGHT. I was at Grandma-over-in-town’s, my math book
propped open on the kitchen table, a plate of cookies next to me. I was
studying to retake the ACT. I often studied at Grandma’s so Dad wouldn’t
lecture me.
The phone rang. It was Shawn. Did I want to watch a movie? I said I did,
and a few minutes later I heard a loud rumble and looked out the window.
With his booming black motorcycle and his wide-brimmed Aussie hat, he
seemed entirely out of place parking parallel to Grandma’s white picket
fence. Grandma started making brownies, and Shawn and I went upstairs to
choose a movie.
We paused the movie when Grandma delivered the brownies. We ate
them in silence, our spoons clicking loudly against Grandma’s porcelain
plates. “You’ll get your twenty-seven,” Shawn said suddenly when we’d
finished.
“It doesn’t matter,” I said. “I don’t think I’ll go either way. What if Dad’s
right? What if I get brainwashed?”
Shawn shrugged. “You’re as smart as Dad. If Dad’s right, you’ll know
when you get there.”
The movie ended. We told Grandma good night. It was a balmy summer
evening, perfect for the motorcycle, and Shawn said I should ride home with
him, we’d get the car tomorrow. He revved the engine, waiting for me to
climb on. I took a step toward him, then remembered the math book on
Grandma’s table.
“You go,” I said. “I’ll be right behind you.”
Shawn yanked his hat down on his head, spun the bike around and
charged down the empty street.
I drove in a happy stupor. The night was black—that thick darkness that
belongs only in backcountry, where the houses are few and the streetlights
fewer, where starlight goes unchallenged. I navigated the winding highway
as I’d done numberless times before, racing down the Bear River Hill,
coasting through the flat stretch parallel to Fivemile Creek. Up ahead the
road climbed and bent to the right. I knew the curve was there without
looking for it, and wondered at the still headlights I saw shining in the
blackness.
I began the ascent. There was a pasture to my left, a ditch to my right. As
the incline began in earnest I saw three cars pulled off near the ditch. The
doors were open, the cab lights on. Seven or eight people huddled around
something on the gravel. I changed lanes to drive around them, but stopped
when I saw a small object lying in the middle of the highway.
It was a wide-brimmed Aussie hat.
I pulled over and ran toward the people clustered by the ditch. “Shawn!” I
shouted.
The crowd parted to let me through. Shawn was facedown on the gravel,
lying in a pool of blood that looked pink in the glare from the headlights. He
wasn’t moving. “He hit a cow coming around the corner,” a man said. “It’s
so dark tonight, he didn’t even see it. We’ve called an ambulance. We don’t
dare move him.”
Shawn’s body was contorted, his back twisted. I had no idea how long an
ambulance might take, and there was so much blood. I decided to stop the
bleeding. I dug my hands under his shoulder and heaved but I couldn’t lift
him. I looked up at the crowd and recognized a face. Dwain.
* He was one of
us. Mother had midwifed four of his eight children.
“Dwain! Help me turn him.”
Dwain hefted Shawn onto his back. For a second that contained an hour, I
stared at my brother, watching the blood trickle out of his temple and down
his right cheek, pouring over his ear and onto his white T-shirt. His eyes
were closed, his mouth open. The blood was oozing from a hole the size of
a golf ball in his forehead. It looked as though his temple had been dragged
on the asphalt, scraping away skin, then bone. I leaned close and peered
inside the wound. Something soft and spongy glistened back at me. I slipped
out of my jacket and pressed it to Shawn’s head.
When I touched the abrasion, Shawn released a long sigh and his eyes
opened.
“Sidlister,” he mumbled. Then he seemed to lose consciousness.
My cellphone was in my pocket. I dialed. Dad answered.
I must have been frantic, sputtering. I said Shawn had crashed his bike,
that he had a hole in his head.
“Slow down. What happened?”
I said it all a second time. “What should I do?”
“Bring him home,” Dad said. “Your mother will deal with it.”
I opened my mouth but no words came out. Finally, I said, “I’m not
joking. His brain, I can see it!”
“Bring him home,” Dad said. “Your mother can handle it.” Then: the dull
drone of a dial tone. He’d hung up.
Dwain had overheard. “I live just through this field,” he said. “Your
mother can treat him there.”
“No,” I said. “Dad wants him home. Help me get him in the car.”
Shawn groaned when we lifted him but he didn’t speak again. Someone
said we should wait for the ambulance. Someone else said we should drive
him to the hospital ourselves. I don’t think anyone believed we would take
him home, not with his brain dribbling out of his forehead.
We folded Shawn into the backseat. I got behind the wheel, and Dwain
climbed in on the passenger side. I checked my rearview mirror to pull onto
the highway, then reached up and shoved the mirror downward so it
reflected Shawn’s face, blank and bloodied. My foot hovered over the gas.
Three seconds passed, maybe four. That’s all it was.
Dwain was shouting, “Let’s go!” but I barely heard him. I was lost to
panic. My thoughts wandered wildly, feverishly, through a fog of
resentment. The state was dreamlike, as if the hysteria had freed me from a
fiction that, five minutes before, I had needed to believe.
I had never thought about the day Shawn had fallen from the pallet. There
was nothing to think about. He had fallen because God wanted him to fall;
there was no deeper meaning in it than that. I had never imagined what it
would have been like to be there. To see Shawn plunge, grasping at air. To
watch him collide, then fold, then lie still. I had never allowed myself to
imagine what happened after—Dad’s decision to leave him by the pickup,
or the worried looks that must have passed between Luke and Benjamin.
Now, staring at the creases in my brother’s face, each a little river of
blood, I remembered. I remembered that Shawn had sat by the pickup for a
quarter of an hour, his brain bleeding. Then he’d had that fit and the boys
had wrestled him to the ground, so that he’d fallen, sustained a second
injury, the injury the doctors said should have killed him. It was the reason
Shawn would never quite be Shawn again.
If the first fall was God’s will, whose was the second?
—
I’D NEVER BEEN TO the hospital in town, but it was easy to find.
Dwain had asked me what the hell I was doing when I flipped a U-turn
and accelerated down the hillside. I’d listened to Shawn’s shallow breathing
as I raced through the valley, along Fivemile Creek, then shot up the Bear
River Hill. At the hospital, I parked in the emergency lane, and Dwain and I
carried Shawn through the glass doors. I shouted for help. A nurse appeared,
running, then another. Shawn was conscious by then. They took him away
and someone shoved me into the waiting room.
There was no avoiding what had to be done next. I called Dad.
“You nearly home?” he said.
“I’m at the hospital.”
There was silence, then he said, “We’re coming.”
Fifteen minutes later they were there, and the three of us waited
awkwardly together, me chewing my fingernails on a pastel-blue sofa,
Mother pacing and clicking her fingers, and Dad sitting motionless beneath
a loud wall clock.
The doctor gave Shawn a CAT scan. He said the wound was nasty but the
damage was minimal, and then I remembered what the last doctors had told
me—that with head injuries, often the ones that look the worst are actually
less severe—and I felt stupid for panicking and bringing him here. The hole
in the bone was small, the doctor said. It might grow over on its own, or a
surgeon could put in a metal plate. Shawn said he’d like to see how it
healed, so the doctor folded the skin over the hole and stitched it.
We took Shawn home around three in the morning. Dad drove, with
Mother next to him, and I rode in the backseat with Shawn. No one spoke.
Dad didn’t yell or lecture; in fact, he never mentioned that night again. But
there was something in the way he fixed his gaze, never looking directly at
me, that made me think a fork had come along in the road, and I’d gone one
way and he the other. After that night, there was never any question of
whether I would go or stay. It was as if we were living in the future, and I
was already gone.
When I think of that night now, I don’t think of the dark highway, or of
my brother lying in a pool of his own blood. I think of the waiting room,
with its ice-blue sofa and pale walls. I smell its sterilized air. I hear the
ticking of a plastic clock.
Sitting across from me is my father, and as I look into his worn face it hits
me, a truth so powerful I don’t know why I’ve never understood it before.
The truth is this: that I am not a good daughter. I am a traitor, a wolf among
sheep; there is something different about me and that difference is not good.
I want to bellow, to weep into my father’s knees and promise never to do it
again. But wolf that I am, I am still above lying, and anyway he would sniff
the lie. We both know that if I ever again find Shawn on the highway, soaked
in crimson, I will do exactly what I have just done.
I am not sorry, merely ashamed.
—
THE ENVELOPE ARRIVED THREE weeks later, just as Shawn was getting back on
his feet. I tore it open, feeling numb, as if I were reading my sentence after
the guilty verdict had already been handed down. I scanned down to the
composite score. Twenty-eight. I checked it again. I checked my name.
There was no mistake. Somehow—and a miracle was the only way I could
account for it—I’d done it.
My first thought was a resolution: I resolved to never again work for my
father. I drove to the only grocery store in town, called Stokes, and applied
for a job bagging groceries. I was only sixteen, but I didn’t tell the manager
that and he hired me for forty hours a week. My first shift started at four
o’clock the next morning.
When I got home, Dad was driving the loader through the junkyard. I
stepped onto the ladder and grabbed hold of the rail. Over the roar of the
engine, I told him I’d found a job but that I would drive the crane in the
afternoons, until he could hire someone. He dropped the boom and stared
ahead.
“You’ve already decided,” he said without glancing at me. “No point
dragging it out.”
I applied to BYU a week later. I had no idea how to write the application,
so Tyler wrote it for me. He said I’d been educated according to a rigorous
program designed by my mother, who’d made sure I met all the
requirements to graduate.
My feelings about the application changed from day to day, almost from
minute to minute. Sometimes I was sure God wanted me to go to college,
because He’d given me that twenty-eight. Other times I was sure I’d be
rejected, and that God would punish me for applying, for trying to abandon
my own family. But whatever the outcome, I knew I would leave. I would go
somewhere, even if it wasn’t to school. Home had changed the moment I’d
taken Shawn to that hospital instead of to Mother. I had rejected some part
of it; now it was rejecting me.
The admissions committee was efficient; I didn’t wait long. The letter
arrived in a normal envelope. My heart sank when I saw it. Rejection letters
are small, I thought. I opened it and read “Congratulations.” I’d been
admitted for the semester beginning January 5.
Mother hugged me. Dad tried to be cheerful. “It proves one thing at
least,” he said. “Our home school is as good as any public education.”
—
THREE DAYS BEFORE I turned seventeen, Mother drove me to Utah to find an
apartment. The search took all day, and we arrived home late to find Dad
eating a frozen supper. He hadn’t cooked it well and it was mush. The mood
around him was charged, combustible. It felt like he might detonate at any
moment. Mother didn’t even kick off her shoes, just rushed to the kitchen
and began shuffling pans to fix a real dinner. Dad moved to the living room
and started cursing at the VCR. I could see from the hallway that the cables
weren’t connected. When I pointed this out, he exploded. He cussed and
waved his arms, shouting that in a man’s house the cables should always be
hooked up, that a man should never have to come into a room and find the
cables to his VCR unhooked. Why the hell had I unhooked them anyway?
Mother rushed in from the kitchen. “I disconnected the cables,” she said.
Dad rounded on her, sputtering. “Why do you always take her side! A
man should be able to expect support from his wife!”
I fumbled with the cables while Dad stood over me, shouting. I kept
dropping them. My mind pulsed with panic, which overpowered every
thought, so that I could not even remember how to connect red to red, white
to white.
Then it was gone. I looked up at my father, at his purple face, at the vein
pulsing in his neck. I still hadn’t managed to attach the cables. I stood, and
once on my feet, didn’t care whether the cables were attached. I walked out
of the room. Dad was still shouting when I reached the kitchen. As I moved
down the hall I looked back. Mother had taken my place, crouching over the
VCR, groping for the wires, as Dad towered over her.
—
WAITING FOR CHRISTMAS THAT year felt like waiting to walk off the edge of a
cliff. Not since Y2K had I felt so certain that something terrible was coming,
something that would obliterate everything I’d known before. And what
would replace it? I tried to imagine the future, to populate it with professors,
homework, classrooms, but my mind couldn’t conjure them. There was no
future in my imagination. There was New Year’s Eve, then there was
nothing.
I knew I should prepare, try to acquire the high school education Tyler
had told the university I had. But I didn’t know how, and I didn’t want to ask
Tyler for help. He was starting a new life at Purdue—he was even getting
married—and I doubted he wanted responsibility for mine.
I noticed, though, when he came home for Christmas, that he was reading
a book called Les Misérables, and I decided that it must be the kind of a
book a college student reads. I bought my own copy, hoping it would teach
me about history or literature, but it didn’t. It couldn’t, because I was unable
to distinguish between the fictional story and the factual backdrop.
Napoleon felt no more real to me than Jean Valjean. I had never heard of
either.
* Asked fifteen years later, Dwain did not recall being there. But he is there, vividly, in my memory.
PART TWO
On New Year’s Day, Mother drove me to my new life. I didn’t take much
with me: a dozen jars of home-canned peaches, bedding, and a garbage bag
full of clothes. As we sped down the interstate I watched the landscape
splinter and barb, the rolling black summits of the Bear River Mountains
giving way to the razor-edged Rockies. The university was nestled in the
heart of the Wasatch Mountains, whose white massifs jutted mightily out of
the earth. They were beautiful, but to me their beauty seemed aggressive,
menacing.
My apartment was a mile south of campus. It had a kitchen, living room
and three small bedrooms. The other women who lived there—I knew they
would be women because at BYU all housing was segregated by gender—
had not yet returned from the Christmas holiday. It took only a few minutes
to bring in my stuff from the car. Mother and I stood awkwardly in the
kitchen for a moment, then she hugged me and drove away.
I lived alone in the quiet apartment for three days. Except it wasn’t quiet.
Nowhere was quiet. I’d never spent more than a few hours in a city and
found it impossible to defend myself from the strange noises that constantly
invaded. The chirrup of crosswalk signals, the shrieking of sirens, the
hissing of air brakes, even the hushed chatter of people strolling on the
sidewalk—I heard every sound individually. My ears, accustomed to the
silence of the peak, felt battered by them.
I was starved for sleep by the time my first roommate arrived. Her name
was Shannon, and she studied at the cosmetology school across the street.
She was wearing plush pink pajama bottoms and a tight white tank with
spaghetti straps. I stared at her bare shoulders. I’d seen women dressed this
way before—Dad called them gentiles—and I’d always avoided getting too
near them, as if their immorality might be catching. Now there was one in
my house.
Shannon surveyed me with frank disappointment, taking in my baggy
flannel coat and oversized men’s jeans. “How old are you?” she said.
“I’m a freshman,” I said. I didn’t want to admit I was only seventeen, and
that I should be in high school, finishing my junior year.
Shannon moved to the sink and I saw the word “Juicy” written across her
rear. That was more than I could take. I backed away toward my room,
mumbling that I was going to bed.
“Good call,” she said. “Church is early. I’m usually late.”
“You go to church?”
“Sure,” she said. “Don’t you?”
“Of course I do. But you, you really go?”
She stared at me, chewing her lip, then said, “Church is at eight. Good
night!”
My mind was spinning as I shut my bedroom door. How could she be a
Mormon?
Dad said there were gentiles everywhere—that most Mormons were
gentiles, they just didn’t know it. I thought about Shannon’s tank and
pajamas, and suddenly realized that probably everyone at BYU was a
gentile.
My other roommate arrived the next day. Her name was Mary and she
was a junior studying early childhood education. She dressed like I expected
a Mormon to dress on Sunday, in a floral skirt that reached to the floor. Her
clothes were a kind of shibboleth to me; they signaled that she was not a
gentile, and for a few hours I felt less alone.
Until that evening. Mary stood suddenly from the sofa and said, “Classes
start tomorrow. Time to stock up on groceries.” She left and returned an
hour later with two paper bags. Shopping was forbidden on the Sabbath—
I’d never purchased so much as a stick of gum on a Sunday—but Mary
casually unpacked eggs, milk and pasta without acknowledging that every
item she was placing in our communal fridge was a violation of the Lord’s
Commandments. When she withdrew a can of Diet Coke, which my father
said was a violation of the Lord’s counsel for health, I again fled to my
room.
—
THE NEXT MORNING, I got on the bus going the wrong direction. By the time
I’d corrected my mistake, the lecture was nearly finished. I stood awkwardly
in the back until the professor, a thin woman with delicate features,
motioned for me to take the only available seat, which was near the front. I
sat down, feeling the weight of everyone’s eyes. The course was on
Shakespeare, and I’d chosen it because I’d heard of Shakespeare and thought
that was a good sign. But now I was here I realized I knew nothing about
him. It was a word I’d heard, that was all.
When the bell rang, the professor approached my desk. “You don’t belong
here,” she said.
I stared at her, confused. Of course I didn’t belong, but how did she
know? I was on the verge of confessing the whole thing—that I’d never gone
to school, that I hadn’t really met the requirements to graduate—when she
added, “This class is for seniors.”
“There are classes for seniors?” I said.
She rolled her eyes as if I were trying to be funny. “This is 382. You
should be in 110.”
It took most of the walk across campus before I understood what she’d
said, then I checked my course schedule and, for the first time, noticed the
numbers next to the course names.
I went to the registrar’s office, where I was told that every freshman-level
course was full. What I should do, they said, was check online every few
hours and join if someone dropped. By the end of the week I’d managed to
squeeze into introductory courses in English, American history, music and
religion, but I was stuck in a junior-level course on art in Western
civilization.
Freshman English was taught by a cheerful woman in her late twenties
who kept talking about something called the “essay form,” which, she
assured us, we had learned in high school.
My next class, American history, was held in an auditorium named for the
prophet Joseph Smith. I’d thought American history would be easy because
Dad had taught us about the Founding Fathers—I knew all about
Washington, Jefferson, Madison. But the professor barely mentioned them
at all, and instead talked about “philosophical underpinnings” and the
writings of Cicero and Hume, names I’d never heard.
In the first lecture, we were told that the next class would begin with a
quiz on the readings. For two days I tried to wrestle meaning from the
textbook’s dense passages, but terms like “civic humanism” and “the
Scottish Enlightenment” dotted the page like black holes, sucking all the
other words into them. I took the quiz and missed every question.
That failure sat uneasily in my mind. It was the first indication of whether
I would be okay, whether whatever I had in my head by way of education
was enough. After the quiz, the answer seemed clear: it was not enough. On
realizing this, I might have resented my upbringing but I didn’t. My loyalty
to my father had increased in proportion to the miles between us. On the
mountain, I could rebel. But here, in this loud, bright place, surrounded by
gentiles disguised as saints, I clung to every truth, every doctrine he had
given me. Doctors were Sons of Perdition. Homeschooling was a
commandment from the Lord.
Failing a quiz did nothing to undermine my new devotion to an old creed,
but a lecture on Western art did.
The classroom was bright when I arrived, the morning sun pouring in
warmly through a high wall of windows. I chose a seat next to a girl in a
high-necked blouse. Her name was Vanessa. “We should stick together,” she
said. “I think we’re the only freshmen in the whole class.”
The lecture began when an old man with small eyes and a sharp nose
shuttered the windows. He flipped a switch and a slide projector filled the
room with white light. The image was of a painting. The professor discussed
the composition, the brushstrokes, the history. Then he moved to the next
painting, and the next and the next.
Then the projector showed a peculiar image, of a man in a faded hat and
overcoat. Behind him loomed a concrete wall. He held a small paper near
his face but he wasn’t looking at it. He was looking at us.
I opened the picture book I’d purchased for the class so I could take a
closer look. Something was written under the image in italics but I couldn’t
understand it. It had one of those black-hole words, right in the middle,
devouring the rest. I’d seen other students ask questions, so I raised my
hand.
The professor called on me, and I read the sentence aloud. When I came
to the word, I paused. “I don’t know this word,” I said. “What does it
mean?”
There was silence. Not a hush, not a muting of the noise, but utter, almost
violent silence. No papers shuffled, no pencils scratched.
The professor’s lips tightened. “Thanks for that,” he said, then returned to
his notes.
I scarcely moved for the rest of the lecture. I stared at my shoes,
wondering what had happened, and why, whenever I looked up, there was
always someone staring at me as if I was a freak. Of course I was a freak,
and I knew it, but I didn’t understand how they knew it.
When the bell rang, Vanessa shoved her notebook into her pack. Then she
paused and said, “You shouldn’t make fun of that. It’s not a joke.” She
walked away before I could reply.
I stayed in my seat until everyone had gone, pretending the zipper on my
coat was stuck so I could avoid looking anyone in the eye. Then I went
straight to the computer lab to look up the word “Holocaust.”
I don’t know how long I sat there reading about it, but at some point I’d
read enough. I leaned back and stared at the ceiling. I suppose I was in
shock, but whether it was the shock of learning about something horrific, or
the shock of learning about my own ignorance, I’m not sure. I do remember
imagining for a moment, not the camps, not the pits or chambers of gas, but
my mother’s face. A wave of emotion took me, a feeling so intense, so
unfamiliar, I wasn’t sure what it was. It made me want to shout at her, at my
own mother, and that frightened me.
I searched my memories. In some ways the word “Holocaust” wasn’t
wholly unfamiliar. Perhaps Mother had taught me about it, when we were
picking rosehips or tincturing hawthorn. I did seem to have a vague
knowledge that Jews had been killed somewhere, long ago. But I’d thought
it was a small conflict, like the Boston Massacre, which Dad talked about a
lot, in which half a dozen people had been martyred by a tyrannical
government. To have misunderstood it on this scale—five versus six million
—seemed impossible.
I found Vanessa before the next lecture and apologized for the joke. I
didn’t explain, because I couldn’t explain. I just said I was sorry and that I
wouldn’t do it again. To keep that promise, I didn’t raise my hand for the rest
of the semester.
—
THAT SATURDAY, I SAT at my desk with a stack of homework. Everything had
to be finished that day because I could not violate the Sabbath.
I spent the morning and afternoon trying to decipher the history textbook,
without much success. In the evening, I tried to write a personal essay for
English, but I’d never written an essay before—except for the ones on sin
and repentance, which no one had ever read—and I didn’t know how. I had
no idea what the teacher meant by the “essay form.” I scribbled a few
sentences, crossed them out, then began again. I repeated this until it was
past midnight.
I knew I should stop—this was the Lord’s time—but I hadn’t even started
the assignment for music theory, which was due at seven A.M. on Monday.
The Sabbath begins when I wake up, I reasoned, and kept working.
I awoke with my face pressed to the desk. The room was bright. I could
hear Shannon and Mary in the kitchen. I put on my Sunday dress and the
three of us walked to church. Because it was a congregation of students,
everyone was sitting with their roommates, so I settled into a pew with
mine. Shannon immediately began chatting with the girl behind us. I looked
around the chapel and was again struck by how many women were wearing
skirts cut above the knee.
The girl talking to Shannon said we should come over that afternoon to
see a movie. Mary and Shannon agreed but I shook my head. I didn’t watch
movies on Sunday.
Shannon rolled her eyes. “She’s very devout,” she whispered.
I’d always known that my father believed in a different God. As a child,
I’d been aware that although my family attended the same church as
everyone in our town, our religion was not the same. They believed in
modesty; we practiced it. They believed in God’s power to heal; we left our
injuries in God’s hands. They believed in preparing for the Second Coming;
we were actually prepared. For as long as I could remember, I’d known that
the members of my own family were the only true Mormons I had ever
known, and yet for some reason, here at this university, in this chapel, for
the first time I felt the immensity of the gap. I understood now: I could stand
with my family, or with the gentiles, on the one side or the other, but there
was no foothold in between.
The service ended and we filed into Sunday school. Shannon and Mary
chose seats near the front. They saved me one but I hesitated, thinking of
how I’d broken the Sabbath. I’d been here less than a week, and already I
had robbed the Lord of an hour. Perhaps that was why Dad hadn’t wanted
me to come: because he knew that by living with them, with people whose
faith was less, I risked becoming like them.
Shannon waved to me and her V-neck plunged. I walked past her and
folded myself into a corner, as far from Shannon and Mary as I could get. I
was pleased by the familiarity of the arrangement: me, pressed into the
corner, away from the other children, a precise reproduction of every
Sunday school lesson from my childhood. It was the only sensation of
familiarity I’d felt since coming to this place, and I relished it.
After that, I rarely spoke to Shannon or Mary and they rarely spoke to me,
except to remind me to do my share of the chores, which I never did. The
apartment looked fine to me. So what if there were rotting peaches in the
fridge and dirty dishes in the sink? So what if the smell slapped you in the
face when you came through the door? To my mind if the stench was
bearable, the house was clean, and I extended this philosophy to my person.
I never used soap except when I showered, usually once or twice a week,
and sometimes I didn’t use it even then. When I left the bathroom in the
morning, I marched right past the hallway sink where Shannon and Mary
always—always—washed their hands. I saw their raised eyebrows and
thought of Grandma-over-in-town. Frivolous, I told myself. I don’t pee on
my hands.
The atmosphere in the apartment was tense. Shannon looked at me like I
was a rabid dog, and I did nothing to reassure her.
—
MY BANK ACCOUNT DECREASED steadily. I had been worried that I might not
pass my classes, but a month into the semester, after I’d paid tuition and rent
and bought food and books, I began to think that even if I did pass I
wouldn’t be coming back to school for one obvious reason: I couldn’t afford
it. I looked up the requirements for a scholarship online. A full-tuition
waiver would require a near-perfect GPA.
I was only a month into the semester, but even so I knew a scholarship
was comically out of reach. American history was getting easier, but only in
that I was no longer failing the quizzes outright. I was doing well in music
theory, but I struggled in English. My teacher said I had a knack for writing
but that my language was oddly formal and stilted. I didn’t tell her that I’d
learned to read and write by reading only the Bible, the Book of Mormon,
and speeches by Joseph Smith and Brigham Young.
The real trouble, however, was Western Civ. To me, the lectures were
gibberish, probably because for most of January, I thought Europe was a
country, not a continent, so very little of what the professor said made sense.
And after the Holocaust incident, I wasn’t about to ask for clarification.
Even so, it was my favorite class, because of Vanessa. We sat together for
every lecture. I liked her because she seemed like the same kind of Mormon
I was: she wore high-necked, loose-fitting clothing, and she’d told me that
she never drank Coke or did homework on Sunday. She was the only person
I’d met at the university who didn’t seem like a gentile.
In February, the professor announced that instead of a single midterm he
would be giving monthly exams, the first of which would be the following
week. I didn’t know how to prepare. There wasn’t a textbook for the class,
just the picture book of paintings and a few CDs of classical compositions. I
listened to the music while flipping through the paintings. I made a vague
effort to remember who had painted or composed what, but I didn’t
memorize spelling. The ACT was the only exam I’d ever taken, and it had
been multiple choice, so I assumed all exams were multiple choice.
The morning of the exam, the professor instructed everyone to take out
their blue books. I barely had time to wonder what a blue book was before
everyone produced one from their bags. The motion was fluid,
synchronized, as if they had practiced it. I was the only dancer on the stage
who seemed to have missed rehearsal. I asked Vanessa if she had a spare,
and she did. I opened it, expecting a multiple-choice exam, but it was blank.
The windows were shuttered; the projector flickered on, displaying a
painting. We had sixty seconds to write the work’s title and the artist’s full
name. My mind produced only a dull buzz. This continued through several
questions: I sat completely still, giving no answers at all.
A Caravaggio flickered onto the screen—Judith Beheading Holofernes. I
stared at the image, that of a young girl calmly drawing a sword toward her
body, pulling the blade through a man’s neck as she might have pulled a
string through cheese. I’d beheaded chickens with Dad, clutching their
scabby legs while he raised the ax and brought it down with a loud thwack,
then tightening my grip, holding on with all I had, when the chicken
convulsed with death, scattering feathers and spattering my jeans with
blood. Remembering the chickens, I wondered at the plausibility of
Caravaggio’s scene: no one had that look on their face—that tranquil,
disinterested expression—when taking off something’s head.
I knew the painting was by Caravaggio but I remembered only the
surname and even that I couldn’t spell. I was certain the title was Judith
Beheading Someone but could not have produced Holofernes even if it had
been my neck behind the blade.
Thirty seconds left. Perhaps I could score a few points if I could just get
something—anything—on the page, so I sounded out the name
phonetically: “Carevajio.” That didn’t look right. One of the letters was
doubled up, I remembered, so I scratched that out and wrote “Carrevagio.”
Wrong again. I auditioned different spellings, each worse than the last.
Twenty seconds.
Next to me, Vanessa was scribbling steadily. Of course she was. She
belonged here. Her handwriting was neat, and I could read what she’d
written: Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio. And next to it, in equally
pristine print, Judith Beheading Holofernes. Ten seconds. I copied the text,
not including Caravaggio’s full name because, in a selective display of
integrity, I decided that would be cheating. The projector flashed to the next
slide.
I glanced at Vanessa’s paper a few more times during the exam but it was
hopeless. I couldn’t copy her essays, and I lacked the factual and stylistic
know-how to compose my own. In the absence of skill or knowledge, I must
have scribbled down whatever occurred to me. I don’t recall whether we
were asked to evaluate Judith Beheading Holofernes, but if we were I’m
sure I would have given my impressions: that the calm on the girl’s face
didn’t sit well with my experience slaughtering chickens. Dressed in the
right language this might have made a fantastic answer—something about
the woman’s serenity standing in powerful counterpoint to the general
realism of the piece. But I doubt the professor was much impressed by my
observation that, “When you chop a chicken’s head off, you shouldn’t smile
because you might get blood and feathers in your mouth.”
The exam ended. The shutters were opened. I walked outside and stood in
the winter chill, gazing up at the pinnacles of the Wasatch Mountains. I
wanted to stay. The mountains were as unfamiliar and menacing as ever, but
I wanted to stay.
I waited a week for the exam results, and twice during that time I
dreamed of Shawn, of finding him lifeless on the asphalt, of turning his
body and seeing his face alight in crimson. Suspended between fear of the
past and fear of the future, I recorded the dream in my journal. Then,
without any explanation, as if the connection between the two were obvious,
I wrote, I don’t understand why I wasn’t allowed to get a decent education
as a child.
The results were handed back a few days later. I had failed.
—
ONE WINTER, WHEN I was very young, Luke found a great horned owl in the
pasture, unconscious and half frozen. It was the color of soot, and seemed as
big as me to my child eyes. Luke carried it into the house, where we
marveled at its soft plumage and pitiless talons. I remember stroking its
striped feathers, so smooth they were waterlike, as my father held its limp
body. I knew that if it were conscious, I would never get this close. I was in
defiance of nature just by touching it.
Its feathers were soaked in blood. A thorn had lanced its wing. “I’m not a
vet,” Mother said. “I treat people.” But she removed the thorn and cleaned
the wound. Dad said the wing would take weeks to mend, and that the owl
would wake up long before then. Finding itself trapped, surrounded by
predators, it would beat itself to death trying to get free. It was wild, he said,
and in the wild that wound was fatal.
We laid the owl on the linoleum by the back door and, when it awoke,
told Mother to stay out of the kitchen. Mother said hell would freeze over
before she surrendered her kitchen to an owl, then marched in and began
slamming pots to make breakfast. The owl flopped about pathetically, its
talons scratching the door, bashing its head in a panic. We cried, and Mother
retreated. Two hours later Dad had blocked off half the kitchen with
plywood sheets. The owl convalesced there for several weeks. We trapped
mice to feed it, but sometimes it didn’t eat them, and we couldn’t clear away
the carcasses. The smell of death was strong and foul, a punch to the gut.
The owl grew restless. When it began to refuse food, we opened the back
door and let it escape. It wasn’t fully healed, but Dad said its chances were
better with the mountain than with us. It didn’t belong. It couldn’t be taught
to belong.
—
I WANTED TO TELL SOMEONE I’d failed the exam, but something stopped me
from calling Tyler. It might have been shame. Or it might have been that
Tyler was preparing to be a father. He’d met his wife, Stefanie, at Purdue,
and they’d married quickly. She didn’t know anything about our family. To
me, it felt as though he preferred his new life—his new family—to his old
one.
I called home. Dad answered. Mother was delivering a baby, which she
was doing more and more now the migraines had stopped.
“When will Mother be home?” I said.
“Don’t know,” said Dad. “Might as well ask the Lord as me, as He’s the
one deciding.” He chuckled, then asked, “How’s school?”
Dad and I hadn’t spoken since he’d screamed at me about the VCR. I
could tell he was trying to be supportive, but I didn’t think I could admit to
him that I was failing. I wanted to tell him it was going well. So easy, I
imagined myself saying.
“Not great,” I said instead. “I had no idea it would be this hard.”
The line was silent, and I imagined Dad’s stern face hardening. I waited
for the jab I imagined he was preparing, but instead a quiet voice said, “It’ll
be okay, honey.”
“It won’t,” I said. “There will be no scholarship. I’m not even going to
pass.” My voice was shaky now.
“If there’s no scholarship, there’s no scholarship,” he said. “Maybe I can
help with the money. We’ll figure it out. Just be happy, okay?”
“Okay,” I said.
“Come on home if you need.”
I hung up, not sure what I’d just heard. I knew it wouldn’t last, that the
next time we spoke everything would be different, the tenderness of this
moment forgotten, the endless struggle between us again in the foreground.
But tonight he wanted to help. And that was something.
—
IN MARCH, THERE WAS ANOTHER exam in Western Civ. This time I made flash
cards. I spent hours memorizing odd spellings, many of them French
(France, I now understood, was a part of Europe). Jacques-Louis David and
François Boucher: I couldn’t say them but I could spell them.
My lecture notes were nonsensical, so I asked Vanessa if I could look at
hers. She looked at me skeptically, and for a moment I wondered if she’d
noticed me cheating off her exam. She said she wouldn’t give me her notes
but that we could study together, so after class I followed her to her dorm
room. We sat on the floor with our legs crossed and our notebooks open in
front of us.
I tried to read from my notes but the sentences were incomplete,
scrambled. “Don’t worry about your notes,” Vanessa said. “They aren’t as
important as the textbook.”
“What textbook?” I said.
“The textbook,” Vanessa said. She laughed as if I were being funny. I
tensed because I wasn’t.
“I don’t have a textbook,” I said.
“Sure you do!” She held up the thick picture book I’d used to memorize
titles and artists.
“Oh that,” I said. “I looked at that.”
“You looked at it? You didn’t read it?”
I stared at her. I didn’t understand. This was a class on music and art.
We’d been given CDs with music to listen to, and a book with pictures of art
to look at. It hadn’t occurred to me to read the art book any more than it had
to read the CDs.
“I thought we were just supposed to look at the pictures.” This sounded
stupid when said aloud.
“So when the syllabus assigned pages fifty through eighty-five, you didn’t
think you had to read anything?”
“I looked at the pictures,” I said again. It sounded worse the second time.
Vanessa began thumbing through the book, which suddenly looked very
much like a textbook.
“That’s your problem then,” she said. “You have to read the textbook.” As
she said this, her voice lilted with sarcasm, as if this blunder, after
everything else—after joking about the Holocaust and glancing at her test—
was too much and she was done with me. She said it was time for me to go;
she had to study for another class. I picked up my notebook and left.
“Read the textbook” turned out to be excellent advice. On the next exam I
scored a B, and by the end of the semester I was pulling A’s. It was a
miracle and I interpreted it as such. I continued to study until two or three
A.M. each night, believing it was the price I had to pay to earn God’s
support. I did well in my history class, better in English, and best of all in
music theory. A full-tuition scholarship was unlikely, but I could maybe get
half.
During the final lecture in Western Civ, the professor announced that so
many students had failed the first exam, he’d decided to drop it altogether.
And poof. My failing grade was gone. I wanted to punch the air, give
Vanessa a high five. Then I remembered that she didn’t sit with me anymore.
When the semester ended I returned to Buck’s Peak. In a few weeks BYU
would post grades; then I’d know if I could return in the fall.
I filled my journals with promises that I would stay out of the junkyard. I
needed money—Dad would have said I was broker than the Ten
Commandments—so I went to get my old job back at Stokes. I turned up at
the busiest hour in the afternoon, when I knew they’d be understaffed, and
sure enough, the manager was bagging groceries when I found him. I asked
if he’d like me to do that, and he looked at me for all of three seconds, then
lifted his apron over his head and handed it to me. The assistant manager
gave me a wink: she was the one who’d suggested I ask during the rush.
There was something about Stokes—about its straight, clean aisles and the
warm people who worked there—that made me feel calm and happy. It’s a
strange thing to say about a grocery store, but it felt like home.
Dad was waiting for me when I came through the back door. He saw the
apron and said, “You’re working for me this summer.”
“I’m working at Stokes,” I said.
“Think you’re too good to scrap?” His voice was raised. “This is your
family. You belong here.”
Dad’s face was haggard, his eyes bloodshot. He’d had a spectacularly bad
winter. In the fall, he’d invested a large sum of money in new construction
equipment—an excavator, a man lift and a welding trailer. Now it was spring
and all of it was gone. Luke had accidentally lit the welding trailer on fire,
burning it to the ground; the man lift had come off a trailer because
someone—I never asked who—hadn’t secured it properly; and the excavator
had joined the scrap heap when Shawn, pulling it on an enormous trailer,
had taken a corner too fast and rolled truck and trailer both. With the luck of
the damned, Shawn had crawled from the wreckage, although he’d hit his
head and couldn’t remember the days before the accident. Truck, trailer and
excavator were totaled.
Dad’s determination was etched into his face. It was in his voice, in the
harshness of it. He had to win this standoff. He’d convinced himself that if I
was on the crew, there’d be fewer accidents, fewer setbacks. “You’re slower
than tar running uphill,” he’d told me a dozen times. “But you get the job
done without smashing anything.”
But I couldn’t do the job, because to do it would be to slide backward. I
had moved home, to my old room, to my old life. If I went back to working
for Dad, to waking up every morning and pulling on steel-toed boots and
trudging out to the junkyard, it would be as if the last four months had never
happened, as if I had never left.
I pushed past Dad and shut myself in my room. Mother knocked a
moment later. She stepped into the room quietly and sat so lightly on the
bed, I barely felt her weight next to me. I thought she would say what she’d
said last time. Then I’d remind her I was only seventeen, and she’d tell me I
could stay.
“You have an opportunity to help your father,” she said. “He needs you.
He’ll never say it but he does. It’s your choice what to do.” There was
silence, then she added, “But if you don’t help, you can’t stay here. You’ll
have to live somewhere else.”
The next morning, at four A.M., I drove to Stokes and worked a ten-hour
shift. It was early afternoon, and raining heavily, when I came home and
found my clothes on the front lawn. I carried them into the house. Mother
was mixing oils in the kitchen, and she said nothing as I passed by with my
dripping shirts and jeans.
I sat on my bed while the water from my clothes soaked into the carpet.
I’d taken a phone with me, and I stared at it, unsure what it could do. There
was no one to call. There was nowhere to go and no one to call.
I dialed Tyler in Indiana. “I don’t want to work in the junkyard,” I said
when he answered. My voice was hoarse.
“What happened?” he said. He sounded worried; he thought there’d been
another accident. “Is everyone okay?”
“Everyone’s fine,” I said. “But Dad says I can’t stay here unless I work in
the junkyard, and I can’t do that anymore.” My voice was pitched
unnaturally high, and it quivered.
Tyler said, “What do you want me to do?”
In retrospect I’m sure he meant this literally, that he was asking how he
could help, but my ears, solitary and suspicious, heard something else: What
do you expect me to do? I began to shake; I felt light-headed. Tyler had been
my lifeline. For years he’d lived in my mind as a last resort, a lever I could
pull when my back was against the wall. But now that I had pulled it, I
understood its futility. It did nothing after all.
“What happened?” Tyler said again.
“Nothing. Everything’s fine.”
I hung up and dialed Stokes. The assistant manager answered. “You done
working today?” she said brightly. I told her I quit, said I was sorry, then put
down the phone. I opened my closet and there they were, where I’d left them
four months before: my scrapping boots. I put them on. It felt as though I’d
never taken them off.
Dad was in the forklift, scooping up a stack of corrugated tin. He would
need someone to place wooden blocks on the trailer so he could offload the
stack. When he saw me, he lowered the tin so I could step onto it, and I rode
the stack up and onto the trailer.
—
MY MEMORIES OF THE UNIVERSITY faded quickly. The scratch of pencils on
paper, the clack of a projector moving to the next slide, the peal of the bells
signaling the end of class—all were drowned out by the clatter of iron and
the roar of diesel engines. After a month in the junkyard, BYU seemed like
a dream, something I’d conjured. Now I was awake.
My daily routine was exactly what it had been: after breakfast I sorted
scrap or pulled copper from radiators. If the boys were working on-site,
sometimes I’d go along to drive the loader or forklift or crane. At lunch I’d
help Mother cook and do the dishes, then I’d return, either to the junkyard
or to the forklift.
The only difference was Shawn. He was not what I remembered. He never
said a harsh word, seemed at peace with himself. He was studying for his
GED, and one night when we were driving back from a job, he told me he
was going to try a semester at a community college. He wanted to study law.
There was a play that summer at the Worm Creek Opera House, and
Shawn and I bought tickets. Charles was also there, a few rows ahead of us,
and at intermission when Shawn moved away to chat up a girl, he shuffled
over. For the first time I was not utterly tongue-tied. I thought of Shannon
and how she’d talked to people at church, the friendly merriment of her, the
way she laughed and smiled. Just be Shannon, I thought to myself. And for
five minutes, I was.
Charles was looking at me strangely, the way I’d seen men look at
Shannon. He asked if I’d like to see a movie on Saturday. The movie he
suggested was vulgar, worldly, one I would never want to see, but I was
being Shannon, so I said I’d love to.
I tried to be Shannon on Saturday night. The movie was terrible, worse
than I’d expected, the kind of movie only a gentile would see. But it was
hard for me to see Charles as a gentile. He was just Charles. I thought about
telling him the movie was immoral, that he shouldn’t be seeing such things,
but—still being Shannon—I said nothing, just smiled when he asked if I’d
like to get ice cream.
Shawn was the only one still awake when I got home. I was smiling when
I came through the door. Shawn joked that I had a boyfriend, and it was a
real joke—he wanted me to laugh. He said Charles had good taste, that I
was the most decent person he knew, then he went to bed.
In my room, I stared at myself in the mirror for a long time. The first
thing I noticed was my men’s jeans and how they were nothing like the jeans
other girls wore. The second thing I noticed was that my shirt was too large
and made me seem more square than I was.
Charles called a few days later. I was standing in my room after a day of
roofing. I smelled of paint thinner and was covered in dust the color of ash,
but he didn’t know that. We talked for two hours. He called the next night,
and the one after. He said we should get a burger on Friday.
—
ON THURSDAY, AFTER I’D finished scrapping, I drove forty miles to the nearest
Walmart and bought a pair of women’s jeans and two shirts, both blue.
When I put them on, I barely recognized my own body, the way it narrowed
and curved. I took them off immediately, feeling that somehow they were
immodest. They weren’t, not technically, but I knew why I wanted them—
for my body, so it would be noticed—and that seemed immodest even if the
clothes were not.
The next afternoon, when the crew had finished for the day, I ran to the
house. I showered, blasting away the dirt, then I laid the new clothes on my
bed and stared at them. After several minutes, I put them on and was again
shocked by the sight of myself. There wasn’t time to change so I wore a
jacket even though it was a warm evening, and at some point, though I can’t
say when or why, I decided that I didn’t need the jacket after all. For the rest
of the night, I didn’t have to remember to be Shannon; I talked and laughed
without pretending at all.
Charles and I spent every evening together that week. We haunted public
parks and ice cream shops, burger joints and gas stations. I took him to
Stokes, because I loved it there, and because the assistant manager would
always give me the unsold doughnuts from the bakery. We talked about
music—about bands I’d never heard of and about how he wanted to be a
musician and travel the world. We never talked about us—about whether we
were friends or something else. I wished he would bring it up but he didn’t.
I wished he would let me know some other way—by gently taking my hand
or putting an arm around me—but he didn’t do that, either.
On Friday we stayed out late, and when I came home the house was dark.
Mother’s computer was on, the screen saver casting a green light over the
living room. I sat down and mechanically checked BYU’s website. Grades
had been posted. I’d passed. More than passed. I’d earned A’s in every
subject except Western Civ. I would get a scholarship for half of my tuition.
I could go back.
Charles and I spent the next afternoon in the park, rocking lazily in tire
swings. I told him about the scholarship. I’d meant it as a brag, but for some
reason my fears came out with it. I said I shouldn’t even be in college, that I
should be made to finish high school first. Or to at least start it.
Charles sat quietly while I talked and didn’t say anything for a long time
after. Then he said, “Are you angry your parents didn’t put you in school?”
“It was an advantage!” I said, half-shouting. My response was instinctive.
It was like hearing a phrase from a catchy song: I couldn’t stop myself from
reciting the next line. Charles looked at me skeptically, as if asking me to
reconcile that with what I’d said only moments before.
“Well, I’m angry,” he said. “Even if you aren’t.”
I said nothing. I’d never heard anyone criticize my father except Shawn,
and I wasn’t able to respond to it. I wanted to tell Charles about the
Illuminati, but the words belonged to my father, and even in my mind they
sounded awkward, rehearsed. I was ashamed at my inability to take
possession of them. I believed then—and part of me will always believe—
that my father’s words ought to be my own.
—
EVERY NIGHT FOR A MONTH, when I came in from the junkyard, I’d spend an
hour scrubbing grime from my fingernails and dirt from my ears. I’d brush
the tangles from my hair and clumsily apply makeup. I’d rub handfuls of
lotion into the pads of my fingers to soften the calluses, just in case that was
the night Charles touched them.
When he finally did, it was early evening and we were in his jeep, driving
to his house to watch a movie. We were just coming parallel to Fivemile
Creek when he reached across the gearshift and rested his hand on mine.
His hand was warm and I wanted to take it, but instead I jerked away as if
I’d been burned. The response was involuntary, and I wished immediately
that I could take it back. It happened again when he tried a second time. My
body convulsed, yielding to a strange, potent instinct.
The instinct passed through me in the form of a word, a bold lyric, strong,
declarative. The word was not new. It had been with me for a while now,
hushed, motionless, as if asleep, in some remote corner of memory. By
touching me Charles had awakened it, and it throbbed with life.
I shoved my hands under my knees and leaned into the window. I couldn’t
let him near me—not that night, and not any night for months—without
shuddering as that word, my word, ripped its way into remembrance. Whore.
We arrived at his house. Charles turned on the TV and settled onto the
sofa; I perched lightly on one side. The lights dimmed, the opening credits
rolled. Charles inched toward me, slowly at first, then more confidently, until
his leg brushed mine. In my mind I bolted, I ran a thousand miles in a single
heartbeat. In reality I merely flinched. Charles flinched, too—I’d startled
him. I repositioned myself, driving my body into the sofa arm, gathering my
limbs and pressing them away from him. I held that unnatural pose for
perhaps twenty seconds, until he understood, hearing the words I couldn’t
say, and moved to the floor.
Charles was my first friend from that other world, the one my father had
tried to protect me from. He was conventional in all the ways and for all the
reasons my father despised conventionality: he talked about football and
popular bands more than the End of Days; he loved everything about high
school; he went to church, but like most Mormons, if he was ill, he was as
likely to call a doctor as a Mormon priest.
I couldn’t reconcile his world with mine so I separated them. Every
evening I watched for his red jeep from my window, and when it appeared
on the highway I ran for the door. By the time he’d bumped up the hill I’d be
waiting on the lawn, and before he could get out I’d be in the jeep, arguing
with him about my seatbelt. (He refused to drive unless I wore one.)
Once, he arrived early and made it to the front door. I stammered
nervously as I introduced him to Mother, who was blending bergamot and
ylang-ylang, clicking her fingers to test the proportions. She said hello but
her fingers kept pulsing. When Charles looked at me as if to ask why,
Mother explained that God was speaking through her fingers. “Yesterday I
tested that I’d get a migraine today if I didn’t have a bath in lavender,” she
said. “I took the bath and guess what? No headache!”
“Doctors can’t cure a migraine before it happens,” Dad chimed in, “but
the Lord can!”
As we walked to his jeep, Charles said, “Does your house always smell
like that?”
“Like what?”
“Like rotted plants.”
I shrugged.
“You must have smelled it,” he said. “It was strong. I’ve smelled it before.
On you. You always smell of it. Hell, I probably do, too, now.” He sniffed
his shirt. I was quiet. I hadn’t smelled anything.
—
DAD SAID I WAS BECOMING “uppity.” He didn’t like that I rushed home from
the junkyard the moment the work was finished, or that I removed every
trace of grease before going out with Charles. He knew I’d rather be bagging
groceries at Stokes than driving the loader in Blackfoot, the dusty town an
hour north where Dad was building a milking barn. It bothered him,
knowing I wanted to be in another place, dressed like someone else.
On the site in Blackfoot, he dreamed up strange tasks for me to do, as if
he thought my doing them would remind me who I was. Once, when we
were thirty feet in the air, scrambling on the purlins of the unfinished roof,
not wearing harnesses because we never wore them, Dad realized that he’d
left his chalk line on the other side of the building. “Fetch me that chalk
line, Tara,” he said. I mapped the trip. I’d need to jump from purlin to
purlin, about fifteen of them, spaced four feet apart, to get the chalk, then
the same number back. It was exactly the sort of order from Dad that was
usually met with Shawn saying, “She’s not doing that.”
“Shawn, will you run me over in the forklift?”
“You can fetch it,” Shawn said. “Unless your fancy school and fancy
boyfriend have made you too good for it.” His features hardened in a way
that was both new and familiar.
I shimmied the length of a purlin, which took me to the framing beam at
the barn’s edge. This was more dangerous in one sense—if I fell to the right,
there would be no purlins to catch me—but the framing beam was thicker,
and I could walk it like a tightrope.
That was how Dad and Shawn became comrades, even if they only agreed
on one thing: that my brush with education had made me uppity, and that
what I needed was to be dragged through time. Fixed, anchored to a former
version of myself.
Shawn had a gift for language, for using it to define others. He began
searching through his repertoire of nicknames. “Wench” was his favorite for
a few weeks. “Wench, fetch me a grinding wheel,” he’d shout, or “Raise the
boom, Wench!” Then he’d search my face for a reaction. He never found
one. Next he tried “Wilbur.” Because I ate so much, he said. “That’s some
pig,” he’d shout with a whistle when I bent over to fit a screw or check a
measurement.
Shawn took to lingering outside after the crew had finished for the day. I
suspect he wanted to be near the driveway when Charles drove up it. He
seemed to be forever changing the oil in his truck. The first night he was out
there, I ran out and jumped into the jeep before he could say a word. The
next night he was quicker on the draw. “Isn’t Tara beautiful?” he shouted to
Charles. “Eyes like a fish and she’s nearly as smart as one.” It was an old
taunt, blunted by overuse. He must have known I wouldn’t react on the site
so he’d saved it, hoping that in front of Charles it might still have sting.
The next night: “You going to dinner? Don’t get between Wilbur and her
food. Won’t be nothin’ left of you but a splat on the pavement.”
Charles never responded. We entered into an unspoken agreement to
begin our evenings the moment the mountain disappeared in the rearview
mirror. In the universe we explored together there were gas stations and
movie theaters; there were cars dotting the highway like trinkets, full of
people laughing or honking, always waving, because this was a small town
and everybody knew Charles; there were dirt roads dusted white with chalk,
canals the color of beef stew, and endless wheat fields glowing bronze. But
there was no Buck’s Peak.
During the day, Buck’s Peak was all there was—that and the site in
Blackfoot. Shawn and I spent the better part of a week making purlins to
finish the barn roof. We used a machine the size of a mobile home to press
them into a Z shape, then we attached wire brushes to grinders and blasted
away the rust so they could be painted. When the paint was dry we stacked
them next to the shop, but within a day or two the wind from the peak had
covered them in black dust, which turned to grime when it mixed with the
oils on the iron. Shawn said they had to be washed before they could be
loaded, so I fetched a rag and a bucket of water.
It was a hot day, and I wiped beads of sweat from my forehead. My
hairband broke. I didn’t have a spare. The wind swept down the mountain,
blowing strands in my eyes, and I reached across my face and brushed them
away. My hands were black with grease, and each stroke left a dark smudge.
I shouted to Shawn when the purlins were clean. He appeared from
behind an I-beam and raised his welding shield. When he saw me, his face
broke into a wide smile. “Our Nigger’s back!” he said.
—
THE SUMMER SHAWN AND I had worked the Shear, there’d been an afternoon
when I’d wiped the sweat from my face so many times that, by the time we
quit for supper, my nose and cheeks had been black. That was the first time
Shawn called me “Nigger.” The word was suprising but not unfamiliar. I’d
heard Dad use it, so in one sense I knew what it meant. But in another
sense, I didn’t understand it as meaning anything at all. I’d only ever seen
one black person, a little girl, the adoptive daughter of a family at church.
Dad obviously hadn’t meant her.
Shawn had called me Nigger that entire summer: “Nigger, run and fetch
those C-clamps!” or “It’s time for lunch, Nigger!” It had never given me a
moment’s pause.
Then the world had turned upside down: I had entered a university, where
I’d wandered into an auditorium and listened, eyes wide, mind buzzing, to
lectures on American history. The professor was Dr. Richard Kimball, and
he had a resonant, contemplative voice. I knew about slavery; I’d heard Dad
talk about it, and I’d read about it in Dad’s favorite book on the American
founding. I had read that slaves in colonial times were happier and more free
than their masters, because the masters were burdened with the cost of their
care. That had made sense to me.
The day Dr. Kimball lectured on slavery, he filled the overhead screen
with a charcoal sketch of a slave market. The screen was large; as in a movie
theater it dominated the room. The sketch was chaotic. Women stood, naked
or half naked, and chained, while men circled them. The projector clacked.
The next image was a photograph, black and white and blurred with age.
Faded and overexposed, the image is iconic. In it a man sits, stripped above
the waist, exposing for the camera a map of raised, crisscrossing scars. The
flesh hardly looks like flesh, from what has been done to it.
I saw many more images in the coming weeks. I’d heard of the Great
Depression years before when I’d played Annie, but the slides of men in
hats and long coats lined up in front of soup kitchens were new to me.
When Dr. Kimball lectured on World War II, the screen showed rows of
fighter planes interspersed with the skeletal remains of bombed cities. There
were faces mixed in—FDR, Hitler, Stalin. Then World War II faded with the
lights of the projector.
The next time I entered the auditorium there were new faces on the screen
and they were black. There hadn’t been a black face on that screen—at least
none that I remembered—since the lectures on slavery. I’d forgotten about
them, these other Americans who were foreign to me. I had not tried to
imagine the end of slavery: surely the call of justice had been heard by all,
and the issue had been resolved.
This was my state of mind when Dr. Kimball began to lecture on
something called the civil rights movement. A date appeared on the screen:
1963. I figured there’d been a mistake. I recalled that the Emancipation
Proclamation had been issued in 1863. I couldn’t account for that hundred
years, so I assumed it was a typo. I copied the date into my notes with a
question mark, but as more photographs flashed across the screen, it became
clear which century the professor meant. The photos were black and white
but their subjects were modern—vibrant, well defined. They were not dry
stills from another era; they captured movement. Marches. Police.
Firefighters turning hoses on young men.
Dr. Kimball recited names I’d never heard. He began with Rosa Parks. An
image appeared of a policeman pressing a woman’s finger into an ink
sponge. Dr. Kimball said she’d taken a seat on a bus. I understood him as
saying she had stolen the seat, although it seemed an odd thing to steal.
Her image was replaced by another, of a black boy in a white shirt, tie
and round-brimmed hat. I didn’t hear his story. I was still wondering at Rosa
Parks, and how someone could steal a bus seat. Then the image was of a
corpse and I heard Dr. Kimball say, “They pulled his body from the river.”
There was a date beneath the image: 1955. I realized that Mother had
been four years old in 1955, and with that realization, the distance between
me and Emmett Till collapsed. My proximity to this murdered boy could be
measured in the lives of people I knew. The calculation was not made with
reference to vast historical or geological shifts—the fall of civilizations, the
erosion of mountains. It was measured in the wrinkling of human flesh. In
the lines on my mother’s face.
The next name was Martin Luther King Jr. I had never seen his face
before, or heard his name, and it was several minutes before I understood
that Dr. Kimball didn’t mean Martin Luther, who I had heard of. It took
several more minutes for me to connect the name with the image on the
screen—of a dark-skinned man standing in front of a white marble temple
and surrounded by a vast crowd. I had only just understood who he was and
why he was speaking when I was told he had been murdered. I was still
ignorant enough to be surprised.
—
“OUR NIGGER’S BACK!”
I don’t know what Shawn saw on my face—whether it was shock, anger
or a vacant expression. Whatever it was, he was delighted by it. He’d found a
vulnerability, a tender spot. It was too late to feign indifference.
“Don’t call me that,” I said. “You don’t know what it means.”
“Sure I do,” he said. “You’ve got black all over your face, like a nigger!”
For the rest of the afternoon—for the rest of the summer—I was Nigger.
I’d answered to it a thousand times before with indifference. If anything, I’d
been amused and thought Shawn was clever. Now it made me want to gag
him. Or sit him down with a history book, as long as it wasn’t the one Dad
still kept in the living room, under the framed copy of the Constitution.
I couldn’t articulate how the name made me feel. Shawn had meant it to
humiliate me, to lock me in time, into an old idea of myself. But far from
fixing me in place, that word transported me. Every time he said it—“Hey
Nigger, raise the boom” or “Fetch me a level, Nigger”—I returned to the
university, to that auditorium, where I had watched human history unfold
and wondered at my place in it. The stories of Emmett Till, Rosa Parks and
Martin Luther King were called to my mind every time Shawn shouted,
“Nigger, move to the next row.” I saw their faces superimposed on every
purlin Shawn welded into place that summer, so that by the end of it, I had
finally begun to grasp something that should have been immediately
apparent: that someone had opposed the great march toward equality;
someone had been the person from whom freedom had to be wrested.
I did not think of my brother as that person; I doubt I will ever think of
him that way. But something had shifted nonetheless. I had started on a path
of awareness, had perceived something elemental about my brother, my
father, myself. I had discerned the ways in which we had been sculpted by a
tradition given to us by others, a tradition of which we were either willfully
or accidentally ignorant. I had begun to understand that we had lent our
voices to a discourse whose sole purpose was to dehumanize and brutalize
others—because nurturing that discourse was easier, because retaining
power always feels like the way forward.
I could not have articulated this, not as I sweated through those searing
afternoons in the forklift. I did not have the language I have now. But I
understood this one fact: that a thousand times I had been called Nigger, and
laughed, and now I could not laugh. The word and the way Shawn said it
hadn’t changed; only my ears were different. They no longer heard the jingle
of a joke in it. What they heard was a signal, a call through time, which was
answered with a mounting conviction: that never again would I allow myself
to be made a foot soldier in a conflict I did not understand.
Dad paid me the day before I returned to BYU. He didn’t have the money
to give what he’d promised, but it was enough to cover the half tuition I
owed. I spent my last day in Idaho with Charles. It was a Sunday, but I
didn’t go to church. I’d had an earache for two days, and during the night it
had changed from a dull twinge to a constant sharp stab. I had a fever. My
vision was distorted, sensitive to light. That’s when Charles called. Did I
want to come to his house? I said I couldn’t see well enough to drive. He
picked me up fifteen minutes later.
I cupped my ear and slouched in the passenger seat, then took off my
jacket and put it over my head to block the light. Charles asked what
medicine I’d taken.
“Lobelia,” I said. “And skullcap.”
“I don’t think they’re working,” he said.
“They will. They take a few days.”
He raised his eyebrows but said nothing.
Charles’s house was neat and spacious, with large, bright windows and
shiny floors. It reminded me of Grandma-over-in-town’s house. I sat on a
stool, my head pressed against the cold counter. I heard the creak of a
cabinet opening and the pop of a plastic lid. When I opened my eyes, two
red pills were on the counter in front of me.
“This is what people take for pain,” Charles said.
“Not us.”
“Who is this us?” Charles said. “You’re leaving tomorrow. You’re not one
of them anymore.”
I closed my eyes, hoping he would drop it.
“What do you think will happen if you take the pills?” he said.
I didn’t answer. I didn’t know what would happen. Mother always said
that medical drugs are a special kind of poison, one that never leaves your
body but rots you slowly from the inside for the rest of your life. She told me
if I took a drug now, even if I didn’t have children for a decade, they would
be deformed.
“People take drugs for pain,” he said. “It’s normal.”
I must have winced at the word “normal,” because he went quiet. He
filled a glass of water and set it in front of me, then gently pushed the pills
forward until they touched my arm. I picked one up. I’d never seen a pill up
close before. It was smaller than I’d expected.
I swallowed it, then the other.
For as long as I could remember, whenever I was in pain, whether from a
cut or a toothache, Mother would make a tincture of lobelia and skullcap. It
had never lessened the pain, not one degree. Because of this, I had come to
respect pain, even revere it, as necessary and untouchable.
Twenty minutes after I swallowed the red pills, the earache was gone. I
couldn’t comprehend its absence. I spent the afternoon swinging my head
from left to right, trying to jog the pain loose again. I thought if I could
shout loudly enough, or move quickly enough, perhaps the earache would
return and I would know the medicine had been a sham after all.
Charles watched in silence but he must have found my behavior absurd,
especially when I began to pull on my ear, which still ached dully, so I could
test the limits of this strange witchcraft.
—
MOTHER WAS SUPPOSED TO drive me to BYU the next morning, but during the
night, she was called to deliver a baby. There was a car sitting in the
driveway—a Kia Sephia Dad had bought from Tony a few weeks before.
The keys were in the ignition. I loaded my stuff into it and drove it to Utah,
figuring the car would just about make up for the money Dad owed me. I
guess he figured that, too, because he never said a word about it.
I moved into an apartment half a mile from the university. I had new
roommates. Robin was tall and athletic, and the first time I saw her she was
wearing running shorts that were much too short, but I didn’t gape at her.
When I met Jenni she was drinking a Diet Coke. I didn’t stare at that, either,
because I’d seen Charles drink dozens of them.
Robin was the oldest, and for some reason she was sympathetic to me.
Somehow she understood that my missteps came from ignorance, not
intention, and she corrected me gently but frankly. She told me exactly what
I would need to do, or not do, to get along with the other girls in the
apartment. No keeping rotten food in the cupboards or leaving rancid dishes
in the sink.
Robin explained this at an apartment meeting. When she’d finished
another roommate, Megan, cleared her throat.
“I’d like to remind everyone to wash their hands after they use the
bathroom,” she said. “And not just with water, but with soap.”
Robin rolled her eyes. “I’m sure everyone here washes their hands.”
That night, after I left the bathroom, I stopped at the sink in the hall and
washed my hands. With soap.
The next day was the first day of class. Charles had designed my course
schedule. He’d signed me up for two music classes and a course on religion,
all of which he said would be easy for me. Then he’d enrolled me in two
more challenging courses—college algebra, which terrified me, and biology,
which didn’t but only because I didn’t know what it was.
Algebra threatened to put an end to my scholarship. The professor spent
every lecture muttering inaudibly as he paced in front of the chalkboard. I
wasn’t the only one who was lost, but I was more lost than anyone else.
Charles tried to help, but he was starting his senior year of high school and
had his own schoolwork. In October I took the midterm and failed it.
I stopped sleeping. I stayed up late, twisting my hair into knots as I tried
to wrest meaning from the textbook, then lying in bed and brooding over my
notes. I developed stomach ulcers. Once, Jenni found me curled up on a
stranger’s lawn, halfway between campus and our apartment. My stomach
was on fire; I was shaking with the pain, but I wouldn’t let her take me to a
hospital. She sat with me for half an hour, then walked me home.
The pain in my stomach intensified, burning through the night, making it
impossible to sleep. I needed money for rent, so I got a job as a janitor for
the engineering building. My shift began every morning at four. Between the
ulcers and the janitorial work, I barely slept. Jenni and Robin kept saying I
should see a doctor but I didn’t. I told them I was going home for
Thanksgiving and that my mother would cure me. They exchanged nervous
glances but didn’t say anything.
Charles said my behavior was self-destructive, that I had an almost
pathological inability to ask for help. He told me this on the phone, and he
said it so quietly it was almost a whisper.
I told him he was crazy.
“Then go talk to your algebra professor,” he said. “You’re failing. Ask for
help.”
It had never occurred to me to talk to a professor—I didn’t realize we
were allowed to talk to them—so I decided to try, if only to prove to Charles
I could do it.
I knocked on his office door a few days before Thanksgiving. He looked
smaller in his office than he did in the lecture hall, and more shiny: the light
above his desk reflected off his head and glasses. He was shuffling through
the papers on his desk, and he didn’t look up when I sat down. “If I fail this
class,” I said, “I’ll lose my scholarship.” I didn’t explain that without a
scholarship, I couldn’t come back.
“I’m sorry,” he said, barely looking at me. “But this is a tough school. It
might be better if you come back when you’re older. Or transfer.”
I didn’t know what he meant by “transfer,” so I said nothing. I stood to go,
and for some reason this softened him. “Truthfully,” he said, “a lot of
people are failing.” He sat back in his chair. “How about this: the final
covers all the material from the semester. I’ll announce in class that anyone
who gets a perfect score on the final—not a ninety-eight but an actual one
hundred—will get an A, no matter how they performed on the midterm.
Sound good?”
I said it did. It was a long shot, but I was the queen of long shots. I called
Charles. I told him I was coming to Idaho for Thanksgiving and I needed an
algebra tutor. He said he would meet me at Buck’s Peak.
When I arrived at the peak, Mother was making the Thanksgiving meal.
The large oak table was covered with jars of tincture and vials of essential
oil, which I cleared away. Charles was coming for dinner.
Shawn was in a mood. He sat on a bench at the table, watching me gather
the bottles and hide them. I’d washed Mother’s china, which had never been
used, and I began laying it out, eyeing the distance between each plate and
knife.
Shawn resented my making a fuss. “It’s just Charles,” he said. “His
standards aren’t that high. He’s with you, after all.”
I fetched glasses. When I put one in front of him, Shawn jabbed a finger
into my ribs, digging hard. “Don’t touch me!” I shrieked. Then the room
turned upside down. My feet were knocked out from under me and I was
swept into the living room, just out of Mother’s sight.
Shawn turned me onto my back and sat on my stomach, pinning my arms
at my sides with his knees. The shock of his weight forced the breath from
my chest. He pressed his forearm into my windpipe. I sputtered, trying to
gulp enough air to shout, but the airway was blocked.
“When you act like a child, you force me to treat you like one.”
Shawn said this loudly, he almost shouted it. He was saying it to me, but
he was not saying it for me. He was saying it for Mother, to define the
moment: I was a misbehaving child; he was setting the child right. The
pressure on my windpipe eased and I felt a delicious fullness in my lungs.
He knew I would not call out.
“Knock it off,” Mother hollered from the kitchen, though I wasn’t sure
whether she meant Shawn or me.
“Yelling is rude,” Shawn said, again speaking to the kitchen. “You’ll stay
down until you apologize.” I said I was sorry for yelling at him. A moment
later I was standing.
I folded napkins from paper towels and put one at each setting. When I
placed one at Shawn’s plate, he again jabbed his finger into my ribs. I said
nothing.
Charles arrived early—Dad hadn’t even come in from the junkyard yet—
and sat at the table across from Shawn, who glared at him, never blinking. I
didn’t want to leave them alone together, but Mother needed help with the
cooking, so I returned to the stove but devised small errands to bring me
back to the table. On one of those trips I heard Shawn telling Charles about
his guns, and on another, about all the ways he could kill a man. I laughed
loudly at both, hoping Charles would think they were jokes. The third time I
returned to the table, Shawn pulled me onto his lap. I laughed at that, too.
The charade couldn’t last, not even until supper. I passed Shawn carrying
a large china plate of dinner rolls, and he stabbed my gut so hard it knocked
the wind out of me. I dropped the plate. It shattered.
“Why did you do that?” I shouted.
It happened so quickly, I don’t know how he got me to the floor, but again
I was on my back and he was on top of me. He demanded that I apologize
for breaking the plate. I whispered the apology, quietly, so Charles wouldn’t
hear, but this enraged Shawn. He grabbed a fistful of my hair, again near the
scalp, for leverage, and yanked me upright, then dragged me toward the
bathroom. The movement was so abrupt, Charles had no time to react. The
last thing I saw as my head hurled down the hall was Charles leaping to his
feet, eyes wide, face pale.
My wrist was folded, my arm twisted behind my back. My head was
shoved into the toilet so that my nose hovered above the water. Shawn was
yelling something but I didn’t hear what. I was listening for the sound of
footsteps in the hall, and when I heard them I became deranged. Charles
could not see me like this. He could not know that for all my pretenses—my
makeup, my new clothes, my china place settings—this is who I was.
I convulsed, arching my body and ripping my wrist away from Shawn. I’d
caught him off guard; I was stronger than he’d expected, or maybe just more
reckless, and he lost his hold. I sprang for the door. I’d made it through the
frame and had taken a step into the hallway when my head shot backward.
Shawn had caught me by the hair, and he yanked me toward him with such
force that we both tumbled back and into the bathtub.
The next thing I remember, Charles was lifting me and I was laughing—a
shrill, demented howl. I thought if I could just laugh loudly enough, the
situation might still be saved, that Charles might yet be convinced it was all
a joke. Tears streamed from my eyes—my big toe was broken—but I kept
cackling. Shawn stood in the doorway looking awkward.
“Are you okay?” Charles kept saying.
“Of course I am! Shawn is so, so, so—funny.” My voice strangled on the
last word as I put weight on my foot and a wave of pain swept through me.
Charles tried to carry me but I pushed him off and walked on the break,
grinding my teeth to stop myself from crying out, while I slapped playfully
at my brother.
Charles didn’t stay for supper. He fled to his jeep and I didn’t hear from
him for several hours, then he called and asked me to meet him at the
church. He wouldn’t come to Buck’s Peak. We sat in his jeep in the dark,
empty parking lot. He was crying.
“You didn’t see what you thought you saw,” I said.
If someone had asked me, I’d have said Charles was the most important
thing in the world to me. But he wasn’t. And I would prove it to him. What
was important to me wasn’t love or friendship, but my ability to lie
convincingly to myself: to believe I was strong. I could never forgive Charles
for knowing I wasn’t.
I became erratic, demanding, hostile. I devised a bizarre and ever evolving rubric by which I measured his love for me, and when he failed to
meet it, I became paranoid. I surrendered to rages, venting all my savage
anger, every fearful resentment I’d ever felt toward Dad or Shawn, at him,
this bewildered bystander who’d only ever helped me. When we argued, I
screamed that I never wanted to see him again, and I screamed it so many
times that one night, when I called to change my mind, like I always did, he
wouldn’t let me.
We met one final time, in a field off the highway. Buck’s Peak loomed
over us. He said he loved me but this was over his head. He couldn’t save
me. Only I could.
I had no idea what he was talking about.
—
WINTER COVERED CAMPUS IN thick snow. I stayed indoors, memorizing
algebraic equations, trying to live as I had before—to imagine my life at the
university as disconnected from my life on Buck’s Peak. The wall separating
the two had been impregnable. Charles was a hole in it.
The stomach ulcers returned, burning and aching through the night. Once,
I awoke to Robin shaking me. She said I’d been shouting in my sleep. I
touched my face and it was wet. She wrapped me in her arms so tight I felt
cocooned.
The next morning, Robin asked me to go with her to a doctor—for the
ulcers but also for an X-ray of my foot, because my big toe had turned black.
I said I didn’t need a doctor. The ulcers would heal, and someone had
already treated the toe.
Robin’s eyebrow rose. “Who? Who treated it?”
I shrugged. She assumed my mother had, and I let her believe it. The
truth was, the morning after Thanksgiving, I had asked Shawn to tell me if it
was broken. He’d knelt on the kitchen floor and I’d dropped my foot into his
lap. In that posture he seemed to shrink. He examined the toe for a moment,
then he looked up at me and I saw something in his blue eyes. I thought he
was about to say he was sorry, but just when I expected his lips to part he
grasped the tip of my toe and yanked. It felt as if my foot had exploded, so
intense was the shock that shot through my leg. I was still trying to swallow
spasms of pain when Shawn stood, put a hand on my shoulder and said,
“Sorry, Siddle Lister, but it hurts less if you don’t see it coming.”
A week after Robin asked to take me to the doctor, I again awoke to her
shaking me. She gathered me up and pressed me to her, as if her body could
hold me together, could keep me from flying apart.
“I think you need to see the bishop,” she said the next morning.
“I’m fine,” I said, making a cliché of myself the way not-fine people do.
“I just need sleep.”
Soon after, I found a pamphlet for the university counseling service on
my desk. I barely looked at it, just knocked it into the trash. I could not see a
counselor. To see one would be to ask for help, and I believed myself
invincible. It was an elegant deception, a mental pirouette. The toe was not
broken because it was not breakable. Only an X-ray could prove otherwise.
Thus, the X-ray would break my toe.
My algebra final was swept up in this superstition. In my mind, it
acquired a kind of mystical power. I studied with the intensity of the insane,
believing that if I could best this exam, win that impossible perfect score,
even with my broken toe and without Charles to help me, it would prove that
I was above it all. Untouchable.
The morning of the exam I limped to the testing center and sat in the
drafty hall. The test was in front of me. The problems were compliant,
pliable; they yielded to my manipulations, forming into solutions, one after
the other. I handed in my answer sheet, then stood in the frigid hallway,
staring up at the screen that would display my score. When it appeared, I
blinked, and blinked again. One hundred. A perfect score.
I was filled with an exquisite numbness. I felt drunk with it and wanted to
shout at the world: Here’s the proof: nothing touches me.
—
BUCK’S PEAK LOOKED THE way it always did at Christmas—a snowy spire,
adorned with evergreens—and my eyes, increasingly accustomed to brick
and concrete, were nearly blinded by the scale and clarity of it.
Richard was in the forklift as I drove up the hill, moving a stack of purlins
for the shop Dad was building in Franklin, near town. Richard was twenty two, and one of the smartest people I knew, but he lacked a high school
diploma. As I passed him in the drive, it occurred to me that he’d probably
be driving that forklift for the rest of his life.
I’d been home for only a few minutes when Tyler called. “I’m just
checking in,” he said. “To see if Richard is studying for the ACT.”
“He’s gonna take it?”
“I don’t know,” Tyler said. “Maybe. Dad and I have been working on
him.”
“Dad?”
Tyler laughed. “Yeah, Dad. He wants Richard to go to college.”
I thought Tyler was joking until an hour later when we sat down to dinner.
We’d only just started eating when Dad, his mouth full of potatoes, said,
“Richard, I’ll give you next week off, paid, if you’ll use it to study them
books.”
I waited for an explanation. It was not long in coming. “Richard is a
genius,” Dad told me a moment later, winking. “He’s five times smarter than
that Einstein was. He can disprove all them socialist theories and godless
speculations. He’s gonna get down there and blow up the whole damn
system.”
Dad continued with his raptures, oblivious to the effect he was having on
his listeners. Shawn slumped on a bench, his back against the wall, his face
tilted toward the floor. To look at him was to imagine a man cut from stone,
so heavy did he seem, so void of motion. Richard was the miracle son, the
gift from God, the Einstein to disprove Einstein. Richard would move the
world. Shawn would not. He’d lost too much of his mind when he’d fallen
off that pallet. One of my father’s sons would be driving the forklift for the
rest of his life, but it wouldn’t be Richard.
Richard looked even more miserable than Shawn. His shoulders hunched
and his neck sank into them, as if he were compressing under the weight of
Dad’s praise. After Dad went to bed, Richard told me that he’d taken a
practice test for the ACT. He’d scored so low, he wouldn’t tell me the
number.
“Apparently I’m Einstein,” Richard said, his head in his hands. “What do
I do? Dad is saying I’m going to blow this thing out of the water, and I’m
not even sure I can pass.”
Every night was the same. Through dinner, Dad would list all the false
theories of science that his genius son would disprove; then after dinner, I
would tell Richard about college, about classes, books, professors, things I
knew would appeal to his innate need to learn. I was worried: Dad’s
expectations were so high, and Richard’s fear of disappointing him so
intense, it seemed possible that Richard might not take the ACT at all.
—
THE SHOP IN FRANKLIN was ready to roof, so two days after Christmas I
forced my toe, still crooked and black, into a steel-toed boot, then spent the
morning on a roof driving threading screws into galvanized tin. It was late
afternoon when Shawn dropped his screw gun and shimmied down the
loader’s extended boom. “Time for a break, Siddle Liss,” he shouted up
from the ground. “Let’s go into town.”
I hopped onto the pallet and Shawn dropped the boom to the ground.
“You drive,” he said, then he leaned his seat back and closed his eyes. I
headed for Stokes.
I remember strange details about the moment we pulled into the parking
lot—the smell of oil floating up from our leather gloves, the sandpaper feel
of dust on my fingertips. And Shawn, grinning at me from the passenger
seat. Through the city of cars I spy one, a red jeep. Charles. I pass through
the main lot and turn into the open asphalt on the north side of the store,
where employees park. I pull down the visor to evaluate myself, noting the
tangle the windy roof has made of my hair, and the grease from the tin that
has lodged in my pores, making them fat and brown. My clothes are heavy
with dirt.
Shawn sees the red jeep. He watches me lick my thumb and scrub dirt
from my face, and he becomes excited. “Let’s go!” he says.
“I’ll wait in the car.”
“You’re coming in,” Shawn says.
Shawn can smell shame. He knows that Charles has never seen me like
this—that every day all last summer, I rushed home and removed every
stain, every smudge, hiding cuts and calluses beneath new clothes and
makeup. A hundred times Shawn has seen me emerge from the bathroom
unrecognizable, having washed the junkyard down the shower drain.
“You’re coming in,” Shawn says again. He walks around the car and
opens my door. The movement is old-fashioned, vaguely chivalrous.
“I don’t want to,” I say.
“Don’t want your boyfriend to see you looking so glamorous?” He smiles
and jabs me with his finger. He is looking at me strangely, as if to say, This
is who you are. You’ve been pretending that you’re someone else. Someone
better. But you are just this.
He begins to laugh, loudly, wildly, as if something funny has happened
but nothing has. Still laughing, he grabs my arm and draws it upward, as if
he’s going to throw me over his back and carry me in fireman-style. I don’t
want Charles to see that so I end the game. I say, flatly, “Don’t touch me.”
What happens next is a blur in my memory. I see only snapshots—of the
sky flipping absurdly, of fists coming at me, of a strange, savage look in the
eyes of a man I don’t recognize. I see my hands grasping the wheel, and I
feel strong arms wrenching my legs. Something shifts in my ankle, a crack
or a pop. I lose my grip. I’m pulled from the car.
I feel icy pavement on my back; pebbles are grinding into my skin. My
jeans have slid down past my hips. I’d felt them peeling off me, inch by inch,
as Shawn yanked my legs. My shirt has risen up and I look at myself, at my
body spread flat on the asphalt, at my bra and faded underwear. I want to
cover myself but Shawn has pinned my hands above my head. I lie still,
feeling the cold seep into me. I hear my voice begging him to let me go, but
I don’t sound like myself. I’m listening to the sobs of another girl.
I am dragged upward and set on my feet. I claw at my clothing. Then I’m
doubled over and my wrist is being folded back, bending, bent as far as it
will go and bending still. My nose is near the pavement when the bone
begins to bow. I try to regain my balance, to use the strength in my legs to
push back, but when my ankle takes weight, it buckles. I scream. Heads turn
in our direction. People crane to see what the commotion is. Immediately I
begin to laugh—a wild, hysterical cackle that despite all my efforts still
sounds a little like a scream.
“You’re going in,” Shawn says, and I feel the bone in my wrist crack.
I go with him into the bright lights. I laugh as we pass through aisle after
aisle, gathering the things he wants to buy. I laugh at every word he says,
trying to convince anyone who might have been in the parking lot that it was
all a joke. I’m walking on a sprained ankle, but the pain barely registers.
We do not see Charles.
The drive back to the site is silent. It’s only five miles but it feels like
fifty. We arrive and I limp toward the shop. Dad and Richard are inside. I’d
been limping before because of my toe, so my new hobble isn’t so
noticeable. Still, Richard takes one look at my face, streaked with grease
and tears, and knows something is wrong; Dad sees nothing.
I pick up my screw gun and drive screws with my left hand, but the
pressure is uneven, and with my weight gathered on one foot, my balance is
poor. The screws bounce off the painted tin, leaving long, twisting marks
like curled ribbons. Dad sends me home after I ruin two sheets.
That night, with a heavily wrapped wrist, I scratch out a journal entry. I
ask myself questions. Why didn’t he stop when I begged him? It was like
getting beaten by a zombie, I write. Like he couldn’t hear me.
Shawn knocks. I slide my journal under the pillow. His shoulders are
rounded when he enters. He speaks quietly. It was a game, he says. He had
no idea he’d hurt me until he saw me cradling my arm at the site. He checks
the bones in my wrist, examines my ankle. He brings me ice wrapped in a
dish towel and says that next time we’re having fun, I should tell him if
something is wrong. He leaves. I return to my journal. Was it really fun and
games? I write. Could he not tell he was hurting me? I don’t know. I just
don’t know.
I begin to reason with myself, to doubt whether I had spoken clearly: what
had I whispered and what had I screamed? I decide that if I had asked
differently, been more calm, he would have stopped. I write this until I
believe it, which doesn’t take long because I want to believe it. It’s
comforting to think the defect is mine, because that means it is under my
power.
I put away my journal and lie in bed, reciting this narrative as if it is a
poem I’ve decided to learn by heart. I’ve nearly committed it to memory
when the recitation is interrupted. Images invade my mind—of me on my
back, arms pressed above my head. Then I’m in the parking lot. I look down
at my white stomach, then up at my brother. His expression is unforgettable:
not anger or rage. There is no fury in it. Only pleasure, unperturbed. Then a
part of me understands, even as I begin to argue against it, that my
humiliation was the cause of that pleasure. It was not an accident or side
effect. It was the objective.
This half-knowledge works in me like a kind of possession, and for a few
minutes I’m taken over by it. I rise from my bed, retrieve my journal, and do
something I have never done before: I write what happened. I do not use
vague, shadowy language, as I have done in other entries; I do not hide
behind hints and suggestion. I write what I remember: There was one point
when he was forcing me from the car, that he had both hands pinned above
my head and my shirt rose up. I asked him to let me fix it but it was like he
couldn’t hear me. He just stared at it like a great big jerk. It’s a good thing
I’m as small as I am. If I was larger, at that moment, I would have torn him
apart.
—
“I DON’T KNOW WHAT you’ve done to your wrist,” Dad told me the next
morning, “but you’re no good on the crew like that. You might as well head
back to Utah.”
The drive to BYU was hypnotic; by the time I arrived, my memories of
the previous day had blurred and faded.
They were brought into focus when I checked my email. There was a
message from Shawn. An apology. But he’d apologized already, in my room.
I had never known Shawn to apologize twice.
I retrieved my journal and I wrote another entry, opposite the first, in
which I revised the memory. It was a misunderstanding, I wrote. If I’d asked
him to stop, he would have.
But however I chose to remember it, that event would change everything.
Reflecting on it now I’m amazed by it, not by what happened, but that I
wrote what happened. That from somewhere inside that brittle shell—in that
girl made vacant by the fiction of invincibility—there was a spark left.
The words of the second entry would not obscure the words of the first.
Both would remain, my memories set down alongside his. There was a
boldness in not editing for consistency, in not ripping out either the one page
or the other. To admit uncertainty is to admit to weakness, to powerlessness,
and to believe in yourself despite both. It is a frailty, but in this frailty there
is a strength: the conviction to live in your own mind, and not in someone
else’s. I have often wondered if the most powerful words I wrote that night
came not from anger or rage, but from doubt: I don’t know. I just don’t
know.
Not knowing for certain, but refusing to give way to those who claim
certainty, was a privilege I had never allowed myself. My life was narrated
for me by others. Their voices were forceful, emphatic, absolute. It had
never occurred to me that my voice might be as strong as theirs.
On Sunday, a week later, a man at church asked me to dinner. I said no. It
happened a second time a few days later with a different man. Again I said
no. I couldn’t say yes. I didn’t want either of them anywhere near me.
Word reached the bishop that there was a woman in his flock who was set
against marriage. His assistant approached me after the Sunday service and
said I was wanted in the bishop’s office.
My wrist was still tender when I shook the bishop’s hand. He was a
middle-aged man with a round face and dark, neatly parted hair. His voice
was soft like satin. He seemed to know me before I even opened my mouth.
(In a way he did; Robin had told him plenty.) He said I should enroll in the
university counseling service so that one day I might enjoy an eternal
marriage to a righteous man.
He talked and I sat, wordless as a brick.
He asked about my family. I didn’t answer. I had already betrayed them by
failing to love them as I should; the least I could do was stay silent.
“Marriage is God’s plan,” the bishop said, then he stood. The meeting
was over. He asked me to return the following Sunday. I said I would, but
knew I wouldn’t.
My body felt heavy as I walked to my apartment. All my life I had been
taught that marriage was God’s will, that to refuse it was a kind of sin. I was
in defiance of God. And yet, I didn’t want to be. I wanted children, my own
family, but even as I longed for it I knew I would never have it. I was not
capable. I could not be near any man without despising myself.
I had always scoffed at the word “whore.” It sounded guttural and
outmoded even to me. But even though I silently mocked Shawn for using it,
I had come to identify with it. That it was old-fashioned only strengthened
the association, because it meant I usually only heard the word in
connection with myself.
Once, when I was fifteen, after I’d started wearing mascara and lip gloss,
Shawn had told Dad that he’d heard rumors about me in town, that I had a
reputation. Immediately Dad thought I was pregnant. He should never have
allowed those plays in town, he screamed at Mother. Mother said I was
trustworthy, modest. Shawn said no teenage girl was trustworthy, and that in
his experience those who seemed pious were sometimes the worst of all.
I sat on my bed, knees pressed to my chest, and listened to them shout.
Was I pregnant? I wasn’t sure. I considered every interaction I’d had with a
boy, every glance, every touch. I walked to the mirror and raised my shirt,
then ran my fingers across my abdomen, examining it inch by inch and
thought, Maybe.
I had never kissed a boy.
I had witnessed birth, but I’d been given none of the facts of conception.
While my father and brother shouted, ignorance kept me silent: I couldn’t
defend myself, because I didn’t understand the accusation.
Days later, when it was confirmed that I was not pregnant, I evolved a
new understanding of the word “whore,” one that was less about actions and
more about essence. It was not that I had done something wrong so much as
that I existed in the wrong way. There was something impure in the fact of
my being.
It’s strange how you give the people you love so much power over you, I
had written in my journal. But Shawn had more power over me than I could
possibly have imagined. He had defined me to myself, and there’s no greater
power than that.
—
I STOOD OUTSIDE THE bishop’s office on a cold night in February. I didn’t
know what had taken me there.
The bishop sat calmly behind his desk. He asked what he could do for
me, and I said I didn’t know. No one could give me what I wanted, because
what I wanted was to be remade.
“I can help,” he said, “but you’ll need to tell me what’s bothering you.”
His voice was gentle, and that gentleness was cruel. I wished he would yell.
If he yelled, it would make me angry, and when angry I felt powerful. I
didn’t know if I could do this without feeling powerful.
I cleared my throat, then talked for an hour.
The bishop and I met every Sunday until spring. To me he was a patriarch
with authority over me, but he seemed to surrender that authority the
moment I passed through his door. I talked and he listened, drawing the
shame from me like a healer draws infection from a wound.
When the semester ended, I told him I was going home for the summer. I
was out of money; I couldn’t pay rent. He looked tired when I told him that.
He said, “Don’t go home, Tara. The church will pay your rent.”
I didn’t want the church’s money. I’d made the decision. The bishop made
me promise only one thing: that I wouldn’t work for my father.
My first day in Idaho, I got my old job back at Stokes. Dad scoffed, said
I’d never earn enough to return to school. He was right, but the bishop had
said God would provide a way and I believed it. I spent the summer
restocking shelves and walking elderly ladies to their cars.
I avoided Shawn. It was easy because he had a new girlfriend, Emily, and
there was talk of a wedding. Shawn was twenty-eight; Emily was a senior in
high school. Her temperament was compliant. Shawn played the same
games with her he’d played with Sadie, testing his control. She never failed
to follow his orders, quivering when he raised his voice, apologizing when
he screamed at her. That their marriage would be manipulative and violent, I
had no doubt—although those words were not mine. They had been given to
me by the bishop, and I was still trying to wrest meaning from them.
When the summer ended, I returned to BYU with only two thousand
dollars. On my first night back, I wrote in my journal: I have so many bills I
can’t imagine how I’m going to pay them. But God will provide either trials
for growth or the means to succeed. The tone of that entry seems lofty,
high-minded, but in it I detect a whiff of fatalism. Maybe I would have to
leave school. That was fine. There were grocery stores in Utah. I would bag
groceries, and one day I’d be manager.
I was shocked out of this resignation two weeks into the fall semester,
when I awoke one night to a blinding pain in my jaw. I’d never felt anything
so acute, so electrifying. I wanted to rip my jaw from my mouth, just to be
rid of it. I stumbled to a mirror. The source was a tooth that had been
chipped many years before, but now it had fractured again, and deeply. I
visited a dentist, who said the tooth had been rotting for years. It would cost
fourteen hundred dollars to repair. I couldn’t afford to pay half that and stay
in school.
I called home. Mother agreed to lend me the money, but Dad attached
terms: I would have to work for him next summer. I didn’t even consider it. I
said I was finished with the junkyard, finished for life, and hung up.
I tried to ignore the ache and focus on my classes, but it felt as though I
were being asked to sit through a lecture while a wolf gnawed on my jaw.
I’d never taken another ibuprofen since that day with Charles, but I began
to swallow them like breath mints. They helped only a little. The pain was in
the nerves, and it was too severe. I hadn’t slept since the ache began, and I
started skipping meals because chewing was unthinkable. That’s when
Robin told the bishop.
He called me to his office on a bright afternoon. He looked at me calmly
from across his desk and said, “What are we going to do about your tooth?”
I tried to relax my face.
“You can’t go through the school year like this,” he said. “But there’s an
easy solution. Very easy, in fact. How much does your father make?”
“Not much,” I said. “He’s been in debt since the boys wrecked all the
equipment last year.”
“Excellent,” he said. “I have the paperwork here for a grant. I’m sure
you’re eligible, and the best part is, you won’t have to pay it back.”
I’d heard about Government grants. Dad said that to accept one was to
indebt yourself to the Illuminati. “That’s how they get you,” he’d said.
“They give you free money, then the next thing you know, they own you.”
These words echoed in my head. I’d heard other students talk about their
grants, and I’d recoiled from them. I would leave school before I would
allow myself to be purchased.
“I don’t believe in Government grants,” I said.
“Why not?”
I told him what my father said. He sighed and looked heavenward. “How
much will it cost to fix the tooth?”
“Fourteen hundred,” I said. “I’ll find the money.”
“The church will pay,” he said quietly. “I have a discretionary fund.”
“That money is sacred.”
The bishop threw his hands in the air. We sat in silence, then he opened
his desk drawer and withdrew a checkbook. I looked at the heading. It was
for his personal account. He filled out a check, to me, for fifteen hundred
dollars.
“I will not allow you to leave school over this,” he said.
The check was in my hand. I was so tempted, the pain in my jaw so
savage, that I must have held it for ten seconds before passing it back.
—
I HAD A JOB at the campus creamery, flipping burgers and scooping ice
cream. I got by between paydays by neglecting overdue bills and borrowing
money from Robin, so twice a month, when a few hundred dollars went into
my account, it was gone within hours. I was broke when I turned nineteen at
the end of September. I had given up on fixing the tooth; I knew I would
never have fourteen hundred dollars. Besides, the pain had lessened: either
the nerve had died or my brain had adjusted to its shocks.
Still, I had other bills, so I decided to sell the only thing I had of any
value—my horse, Bud. I called Shawn and asked how much I could get.
Shawn said a mixed breed wasn’t worth much, but that I could send him to
auction like Grandpa’s dog-food horses. I imagined Bud in a meat grinder,
then said, “Try to find a buyer first.” A few weeks later Shawn sent me a
check for a few hundred dollars. When I called Shawn and asked who he’d
sold Bud to, he mumbled something vague about a guy passing through
from Tooele.
I was an incurious student that semester. Curiosity is a luxury reserved
for the financially secure: my mind was absorbed with more immediate
concerns, such as the exact balance of my bank account, who I owed how
much, and whether there was anything in my room I could sell for ten or
twenty dollars. I submitted my homework and studied for my exams, but I
did so out of terror—of losing my scholarship should my GPA fall a single
decimal—not from real interest in my classes.
In December, after my last paycheck of the month, I had sixty dollars in
my account. Rent was $110, due January 7. I needed quick cash. I’d heard
there was a clinic near the mall that paid people for plasma. A clinic
sounded like a part of the Medical Establishment, but I reasoned that as
long as they were taking things out, not putting anything in, I’d be okay. The
nurse stabbed at my veins for twenty minutes, then said they were too small.
I bought a tank of gas with my last thirty dollars and drove home for
Christmas. On Christmas morning, Dad gave me a rifle—I didn’t take it out
of the box, so I have no idea what kind. I asked Shawn if he wanted to buy it
off me, but Dad gathered it up and said he’d keep it safe.
That was it, then. There was nothing left to sell, no more childhood
friends or Christmas presents. It was time to quit school and get a job. I
accepted that. My brother Tony was living in Las Vegas, working as a long haul trucker, so on Christmas Day I called him. He said I could live with
him for a few months and work at the In-N-Out Burger across the street.
I hung up and was walking down the hall, wishing I’d asked Tony if he
could lend me the money to get to Vegas, when a gruff voice called to me.
“Hey, Siddle Lister. Come here a minute.”
Shawn’s bedroom was filthy. Dirty clothes littered the floor, and I could
see the butt of a handgun poking out from under a pile of stained T-shirts.
The bookshelves strained under boxes of ammo and stacks of Louis
L’Amour paperbacks. Shawn was sitting on the bed, his shoulders hunched,
his legs bowed outward. He looked as if he’d been holding that posture for
some time, contemplating the squalor. He let out a sigh, then stood and
walked toward me, lifting his right arm. I took an involuntary step back, but
he had only reached into his pocket. He pulled out his wallet, opened it and
extracted a crisp hundred-dollar bill.
“Merry Christmas,” he said. “You won’t waste this like I will.”
—
I BELIEVED THAT HUNDRED dollars was a sign from God. I was supposed to
stay in school. I drove back to BYU and paid my rent. Then, because I knew
I wouldn’t be able to pay it in February, I took a second job as a domestic
cleaner, driving twenty minutes north three days a week to scrub expensive
homes in Draper.
The bishop and I were still meeting every Sunday. Robin had told him
that I hadn’t bought my textbooks for the semester. “This is ridiculous,” he
said. “Apply for the grant! You’re poor! That’s why these grants exist!”
My opposition was beyond rational, it was visceral.
“I make a lot of money,” the bishop said. “I pay a lot of taxes. Just think
of it as my money.” He had printed out the application forms, which he gave
to me. “Think about it. You need to learn to accept help, even from the
Government.”
I took the forms. Robin filled them out. I refused to send them.
“Just get the paperwork together,” she said. “See how it feels.”
I needed my parents’ tax returns. I wasn’t even sure my parents filed
taxes, but if they did, I knew Dad wouldn’t give them to me if he knew why
I wanted them. I thought up a dozen fake reasons for why I might need
them, but none were believable. I pictured the returns sitting in the large
gray filing cabinet in the kitchen. Then I decided to steal them.
I left for Idaho just before midnight, hoping I would arrive at around three
in the morning and the house would be quiet. When I reached the peak, I
crept up the driveway, wincing each time a bit of gravel snapped beneath my
tires. I eased the car door open noiselessly, then padded across the grass and
slipped through the back door, moving silently through the house, reaching
my hand out to feel my way to the filing cabinet.
I had only made it a few steps when I heard a familiar clink.
“Don’t shoot!” I shouted. “It’s me!”
“Who?”
I flipped the light switch and saw Shawn sitting across the room, pointing
a pistol at me. He lowered it. “I thought you were…someone else.”
“Obviously,” I said.
We stood awkwardly for a moment, then I went to bed.
The next morning, after Dad left for the junkyard, I told Mother one of
my fake stories about BYU needing her tax returns. She knew I was lying—
I could tell because when Dad came in unexpectedly and asked why she was
copying the returns, she said the duplicates were for her records.
I took the copies and returned to BYU. Shawn and I exchanged no words
before I left. He never asked why I’d been sneaking into my own house at
three in the morning, and I never asked who he’d been waiting for, sitting up
in the middle of the night, with a loaded pistol.
—
THE FORMS SAT ON my desk for a week before Robin walked with me to the
post office and watched me hand them to the postal worker. It didn’t take
long, a week, maybe two. I was cleaning houses in Draper when the mail
came, so Robin left the letter on my bed with a note that I was a Commie
now.
I tore open the envelope and a check fell onto my bed. For four thousand
dollars. I felt greedy, then afraid of my greed. There was a contact number. I
dialed it.
“There’s a problem,” I told the woman who answered. “The check is for
four thousand dollars, but I only need fourteen hundred.”
The line was silent.
“Hello? Hello?”
“Let me get this straight,” the woman said. “You’re saying the check is for
too much money? What do you want me to do?”
“If I send it back, could you send me another one? I only need fourteen
hundred. For a root canal.”
“Look, honey,” she said. “You get that much because that’s how much
you get. Cash it or don’t, it’s up to you.”
I had the root canal. I bought my textbooks, paid rent, and had money left
over. The bishop said I should treat myself to something, but I said I
couldn’t, I had to save the money. He told me I could afford to spend some.
“Remember,” he said, “you can apply for the same amount next year.” I
bought a new Sunday dress.
I’d believed the money would be used to control me, but what it did was
enable me to keep my word to myself: for the first time, when I said I would
never again work for my father, I believed it.
I wonder now if the day I set out to steal that tax return wasn’t the first
time I left home to go to Buck’s Peak. That night I had entered my father’s
house as an intruder. It was a shift in mental language, a surrendering of
where I was from.
My own words confirmed it. When other students asked where I was
from, I said, “I’m from Idaho,” a phrase that, as many times as I’ve had to
repeat it over the years, has never felt comfortable in my mouth. When you
are part of a place, growing that moment in its soil, there’s never a need to
say you’re from there. I never uttered the words “I’m from Idaho” until I’d
left it.
I had a thousand dollars in my bank account. It felt strange just to think
that, let alone say it. A thousand dollars. Extra. That I did not immediately
need. It took weeks for me to come to terms with this fact, but as I did, I
began to experience the most powerful advantage of money: the ability to
think of things besides money.
My professors came into focus, suddenly and sharply; it was as if before
the grant I’d been looking at them through a blurred lens. My textbooks
began to make sense, and I found myself doing more than the required
reading.
It was in this state that I first heard the term bipolar disorder. I was sitting
in Psychology 101 when the professor read the symptoms aloud from the
overhead screen: depression, mania, paranoia, euphoria, delusions of
grandeur and persecution. I listened with a desperate interest.
This is my father, I wrote in my notes. He’s describing Dad.
A few minutes before the bell rang, a student asked what role mental
disorders might have played in separatist movements. “I’m thinking of
famous conflicts like Waco, Texas, or Ruby Ridge, Idaho,” he said.
Idaho isn’t famous for many things, so I figured I’d have heard of
whatever “Ruby Ridge” was. He’d said it was a conflict. I searched my
memory, trying to recall if I’d ever heard the words. There was something
familiar in them. Then images appeared in my mind, weak and distorted, as
if the transmission were being disrupted at the source. I closed my eyes and
the scene became vivid. I was in our house, crouching behind the birchwood
cabinets. Mother was kneeling next to me, her breath slow and tired. She
licked her lips and said she was thirsty, then before I could stop her she
stood and reached for the tap. I felt the tremor of gunfire and heard myself
shout. There was a thud as something heavy fell to the floor. I moved her
arm aside and gathered up the baby.
The bell rang. The auditorium emptied. I went to the computer lab. I
hesitated for a moment over the keyboard—struck by a premonition that this
was information I might regret knowing—then typed “Ruby Ridge” into the
browser. According to Wikipedia, Ruby Ridge was the site of a deadly
standoff between Randy Weaver and a number of Federal agencies,
including the U.S. Marshals Service and the FBI.
The name Randy Weaver was familiar, and even as I read it I heard it
falling from my father’s lips. Then the story as it had lived in my
imagination for thirteen years began replaying in my mind: the shooting of a
boy, then of his father, then of his mother. The Government had murdered
the entire family, parents and children, to cover up what they had done.
I scrolled past the backstory to the first shooting. Federal agents had
surrounded the Weaver cabin. The mission was surveillance only, and the
Weavers were unaware of the agents until a dog began to bark. Believing the
dog had sensed a wild animal, Randy’s fourteen-year-old son, Sammy,
charged into the woods. The agents shot the dog, and Sammy, who was
carrying a gun, opened fire. The resulting conflict left two dead: a federal
agent and Sammy, who was retreating, running up the hill toward the cabin,
when he was shot in the back.
I read on. The next day, Randy Weaver was shot, also in the back, while
trying to visit his son’s body. The corpse was in the shed, and Randy was
lifting the latch on the door, when a sniper took aim at his spine and missed.
His wife, Vicki, moved toward the door to help her husband and again the
sniper opened fire. The bullet struck her in the head, killing her instantly as
she held their ten-month-old daughter. For nine days the family huddled in
the cabin with their mother’s body, until finally negotiators ended the
standoff and Randy Weaver was arrested.
I read this last line several times before I understood it. Randy Weaver
was alive? Did Dad know?
I kept reading. The nation had been outraged. Articles had appeared in
nearly every major newspaper blasting the government’s callous disregard
for life. The Department of Justice had opened an investigation, and the
Senate had held hearings. Both had recommended reforms to the rules of
engagement, particularly concerning the use of deadly force.
The Weavers had filed a wrongful death suit for $200 million but settled
out of court when the government offered Vicki’s three daughters $1 million
each. Randy Weaver was awarded $100,000 and all charges, except two
related to court appearances, were dropped. Randy Weaver had been
interviewed by major news organizations and had even co-written a book
with his daughter. He now made his living speaking at gun shows.
If it was a cover-up, it was a very bad one. There had been media
coverage, official inquiries, oversight. Wasn’t that the measure of a
democracy?
There was one thing I still didn’t understand: Why had federal agents
surrounded Randy Weaver’s cabin in the first place? Why had Randy been
targeted? I remembered Dad saying it could just as easy be us. Dad was
always saying that one day the Government would come after folks who
resisted its brainwashing, who didn’t put their kids in school. For thirteen
years, I’d assumed that this was why the Government had come for Randy:
to force his children into school.
I returned to the top of the page and read the whole entry again, but this
time I didn’t skip the backstory. According to all the sources, including
Randy Weaver himself, the conflict had begun when Randy sold two sawed off shotguns to an undercover agent he’d met at an Aryan Nations gathering.
I read this sentence more than once, many times in fact. Then I understood:
white supremacy was at the heart of this story, not homeschool. The
government, it seemed, had never been in the habit of murdering people for
not submitting their children to a public education. This seemed so obvious
to me now, it was difficult to understand why I had ever believed anything
else.
For one bitter moment, I thought Dad had lied. Then I remembered the
fear on his face, the heavy rattling of his breath, and I felt certain that he’d
really believed we were in danger. I reached for some explanation and
strange words came to mind, words I’d learned only minutes before:
paranoia, mania, delusions of grandeur and persecution. And finally the
story made sense—the one on the page, and the one that had lived in me
through childhood. Dad must have read about Ruby Ridge or seen it on the
news, and somehow as it passed through his feverish brain, it had ceased to
be a story about someone else and had become a story about him. If the
Government was after Randy Weaver, surely it must also be after Gene
Westover, who’d been holding the front line in the war with the Illuminati
for years. No longer content to read about the brave deeds of others, he had
forged himself a helmet and mounted a nag.
—
I BECAME OBSESSED WITH bipolar disorder. We were required to write a
research paper for Psychology and I chose it as my subject, then used the
paper as an excuse to interrogate every neuroscientist and cognitive
specialist at the university. I described Dad’s symptoms, attributing them
not to my father but to a fictive uncle. Some of the symptoms fit perfectly;
others did not. The professors told me that every case is different.
“What you’re describing sounds more like schizophrenia,” one said. “Did
your uncle ever get treatment?”
“No,” I said. “He thinks doctors are part of a Government conspiracy.”
“That does complicate things,” he said.
With all the subtlety of a bulldozer I wrote my paper on the effect bipolar
parents have on their children. It was accusative, brutal. I wrote that children
of bipolar parents are hit with double risk factors: first, because they are
genetically predisposed to mood disorders, and second, because of the
stressful environment and poor parenting of parents with such disorders.
In class I had been taught about neurotransmitters and their effect on
brain chemistry; I understood that disease is not a choice. This knowledge
might have made me sympathetic to my father, but it didn’t. I felt only anger.
We were the ones who’d paid for it, I thought. Mother. Luke. Shawn. We had
been bruised and gashed and concussed, had our legs set on fire and our
heads cut open. We had lived in a state of alert, a kind of constant terror, our
brains flooding with cortisol because we knew that any of those things
might happen at any moment. Because Dad always put faith before safety.
Because he believed himself right, and he kept on believing himself right—
after the first car crash, after the second, after the bin, the fire, the pallet.
And it was us who paid.
I visited Buck’s Peak the weekend after I submitted my paper. I had been
home for less than an hour when Dad and I got into an argument. He said I
owed him for the car. He really only mentioned it but I became crazed,
hysterical. For the first time in my life I shouted at my father—not about the
car, but about the Weavers. I was so suffocated by rage, my words didn’t
come out as words but as choking, sputtering sobs. Why are you like this?
Why did you terrify us like that? Why did you fight so hard against made-up
monsters, but do nothing about the monsters in your own house?
Dad gaped at me, astonished. His mouth sagged and his hands hung
limply at his sides, twitching, as if he wanted to raise them, to do something.
I hadn’t seen him look so helpless since he’d crouched next to our wrecked
station wagon, watching Mother’s face bulge and distend, unable even to
touch her because electrified cables were sending a deadly pulse through the
metal.
Out of shame or anger, I fled. I drove without stopping back to BYU. My
father called a few hours later. I didn’t answer. Screaming at him hadn’t
helped; maybe ignoring him would.
When the semester ended, I stayed in Utah. It was the first summer that I
didn’t return to Buck’s Peak. I did not speak to my father, not even on the
phone. This estrangement was not formalized: I just didn’t feel like seeing
him, or hearing his voice, so I didn’t.
—
I DECIDED TO EXPERIMENT with normality. For nineteen years I’d lived the
way my father wanted. Now I would try something else.
I moved to a new apartment on the other side of town where no one knew
me. I wanted a new start. At church my first week, my new bishop greeted
me with a warm handshake, then moved on to the next newcomer. I reveled
in his disinterest. If I could just pretend to be normal for a little while,
maybe it would feel like the truth.
It was at church that I met Nick. Nick had square glasses and dark hair,
which he gelled and teased into neat spikes. Dad would have scoffed at a
man wearing hair gel, which is perhaps why I loved it. I also loved that Nick
wouldn’t have known an alternator from a crankshaft. What he did know
were books and video games and clothing brands. And words. He had an
astonishing vocabulary.
Nick and I were a couple from the beginning. He grabbed my hand the
second time we met. When his skin touched mine, I prepared to fight that
primal need to push him away, but it never came. It was strange and exciting,
and no part of me wanted it to end. I wished I were still in my old
congregation, so I could rush to my old bishop and tell him I wasn’t broken
anymore.
I overestimated my progress. I was so focused on what was working, I
didn’t notice what wasn’t. We’d been together a few months, and I’d spent
many evenings with his family, before I ever said a word about mine. I did it
without thinking, casually mentioned one of Mother’s oils when Nick said
he had an ache in his shoulder. He was intrigued—he’d been waiting for me
to bring them up—but I was angry at myself for the slip, and didn’t let it
happen again.
—
I BEGAN TO FEEL poorly toward the end of May. A week passed in which I
could hardly drag myself to my job, an internship at a law firm. I slept from
early evening until late morning, then yawned through the day. My throat
began to ache and my voice dropped, roughening into a deep crackle, as if
my vocal cords had turned to sandpaper.
At first Nick was amused that I wouldn’t see a doctor, but as the illness
progressed his amusement turned to worry, then confusion. I blew him off.
“It’s not that serious,” I said. “I’d go if it were serious.”
Another week passed. I quit my internship and began sleeping through
the days as well as the nights. One morning, Nick showed up unexpectedly.
“We’re going to the doctor,” he said.
I started to say I wouldn’t go, but then I saw his face. He looked as though
he had a question but knew there was no point in asking it. The tense line of
his mouth, the narrowing of his eyes. This is what distrust looks like, I
thought.
Given the choice between seeing an evil socialist doctor, and admitting to
my boyfriend that I believed doctors were evil socialists, I chose to see the
doctor.
“I’ll go today,” I said. “I promise. But I’d rather go alone.”
“Fine,” he said.
He left, but now I had another problem. I didn’t know how to go to a
doctor. I called a friend from class and asked if she’d drive me. She picked
me up an hour later and I watched, perplexed, as she drove right past the
hospital a few blocks from my apartment. She took me to a small building
north of campus, which she called a “clinic.” I tried to feign nonchalance,
act as though I’d done this before, but as we crossed the parking lot I felt as
though Mother were watching me.
I didn’t know what to say to the receptionist. My friend attributed my
silence to my throat and explained my symptoms. We were told to wait.
Eventually a nurse led me to a small white room where she weighed me,
took my blood pressure, and swabbed my tongue. Sore throats this severe
were usually caused by strep bacteria or the mono virus, she said. They
would know in a few days.
When the results came back, I drove to the clinic alone. A balding
middle-aged doctor gave me the results. “Congratulations,” he said. “You’re
positive for strep and mono. Only person I’ve seen in a month to get both.”
“Both?” I whispered. “How can I have both?”
“Very, very bad luck,” he said. “I can give you penicillin for the strep, but
there’s not much I can do for the mono. You’ll have to wait it out. Still, once
we’ve cleared out the strep, you should feel better.”
The doctor asked a nurse to bring some penicillin. “We should start you
on the antibiotics right away,” he said. I held the pills in my palm and was
reminded of that afternoon when Charles had given me ibuprofen. I thought
of Mother, and of the many times she’d told me that antibiotics poison the
body, that they cause infertility and birth defects. That the spirit of the Lord
cannot dwell in an unclean vessel, and that no vessel is clean when it
forsakes God and relies on man. Or maybe Dad had said that last part.
I swallowed the pills. Perhaps it was desperation because I felt so poorly,
but I think the reason was more mundane: curiosity. There I was, in the
heart of the Medical Establishment, and I wanted to see, at long last, what it
was I had always been afraid of. Would my eyes bleed? My tongue fall out?
Surely something awful would happen. I needed to know what.
I returned to my apartment and called Mother. I thought confessing would
alleviate my guilt. I told her I’d seen a doctor, and that I had strep and mono.
“I’m taking penicillin,” I said. “I just wanted you to know.”
She began talking rapidly but I didn’t hear much of it, I was so tired.
When she seemed to be winding down, I said “I love you” and hung up.
Two days later a package arrived, express from Idaho. Inside were six
bottles of tincture, two vials of essential oil, and a bag of white clay. I
recognized the formulas—the oils and tinctures were to fortify the liver and
kidneys, and the clay was a foot soak to draw toxins. There was a note from
Mother: These herbs will flush the antibiotics from your system. Please use
them for as long as you insist on taking the drugs. Love you.
I leaned back into my pillow and fell asleep almost instantly, but before I
did I laughed out loud. She hadn’t sent any remedies for the strep or the
mono. Only for the penicillin.
—
I AWOKE THE NEXT MORNING to my phone ringing. It was Audrey.
“There’s been an accident,” she said.
Her words transported me to another moment, to the last time I’d
answered a phone and heard those words instead of a greeting. I thought of
that day, and of what Mother had said next. I hoped Audrey was reading
from a different script.
“It’s Dad,” she said. “If you hurry—leave right now—you can say
goodbye.”
There’s a story I was told when I was young, told so many times and from
such an early age, I can’t remember who told it to me first. It was about
Grandpa-down-the-hill and how he got the dent above his right temple.
When Grandpa was a younger man, he had spent a hot summer on the
mountain, riding the white mare he used for cowboy work. She was a tall
horse, calmed with age. To hear Mother tell it that mare was steady as a
rock, and Grandpa didn’t pay much attention when he rode her. He’d drop
the knotted reins if he felt like it, maybe to pick a burr out of his boot or
sweep off his red cap and wipe his face with his shirtsleeve. The mare stood
still. But tranquil as she was, she was terrified of snakes.
“She must have glimpsed something slithering in the weeds,” Mother
would say when she told the story, “because she chucked Grandpa clean
off.” There was an old set of harrows behind him. Grandpa flew into them
and a disc caved in his forehead.
What exactly it was that shattered Grandpa’s skull changed every time I
heard the story. In some tellings it was harrows, but in others it was a rock. I
suspect nobody knows for sure. There weren’t any witnesses. The blow
rendered Grandpa unconscious, and he doesn’t remember much until
Grandma found him on the porch, soaked to his boots in blood.
Nobody knows how he came to be on that porch.
From the upper pasture to the house is a distance of a mile—rocky terrain
with steep, unforgiving hills, which Grandpa could not have managed in his
condition. But there he was. Grandma heard a faint scratching at the door,
and when she opened it there was Grandpa, lying in a heap, his brains
dripping out of his head. She rushed him to town and they fitted him with a
metal plate.
After Grandpa was home and recovering, Grandma went looking for the
white mare. She walked all over the mountain but found her tied to the fence
behind the corral, tethered with an intricate knot that nobody used except
her father, Lott.
Sometimes, when I was at Grandma’s eating the forbidden cornflakes and
milk, I’d ask Grandpa to tell me how he got off the mountain. He always
said he didn’t know. Then he’d take a deep breath—long and slow, like he
was settling into a mood rather than a story—and he’d tell the whole tale
from start to finish. Grandpa was a quiet man, near silent. You could pass a
whole afternoon clearing fields with him and never hear ten words strung
together. Just “Yep” and “Not that one” and “I reckon so.”
But ask how he got down the mountain that day and he’d talk for ten
minutes, even though all he remembered was lying in the field, unable to
open his eyes, while the hot sun dried the blood on his face.
“But I tell you this,” Grandpa would say, taking off his hat and running
his fingers over the dent in his skull. “I heard things while I was lyin’ in
them weeds. Voices, and they was talking. I recognized one, because it was
Grandpa Lott. He was a tellin’ somebody that Albert’s son was in trouble. It
was Lott sayin’ that, I know it sure as I know I’m standing here.” Grandpa’s
eyes would shine a bit, then he’d say, “Only thing is, Lott had been dead
near ten years.”
This part of the story called for reverence. Mother and Grandma both
loved to tell it but I liked Mother’s telling best. Her voice hushed in the right
places. It was angels, she would say, a small tear falling to the corner of her
smile. Your great-grandpa Lott sent them, and they carried Grandpa down
the mountain.
The dent was unsightly, a two-inch crater in his forehead. As a child,
when I looked at it, sometimes I imagined a tall doctor in a white coat
banging on a sheet of metal with a hammer. In my imagination the doctor
used the same corrugated sheets of tin that Dad used to roof hay sheds.
But that was only sometimes. Usually I saw something else. Proof that my
ancestors walked that peak, watching and waiting, angels at their command.
—
I DON’T KNOW WHY Dad was alone on the mountain that day.
The car crusher was coming. I suppose he wanted to remove that last fuel
tank, but I can’t imagine what possessed him to light his torch without first
draining the fuel. I don’t know how far he got, how many of the iron belts he
managed to sever, before a spark from the torch made it into the tank. But I
know Dad was standing next to the car, his body pressed against the frame,
when the tank exploded.
He was wearing a long-sleeved shirt, leather gloves and a welding shield.
His face and fingers took the brunt of the blast. The heat from the explosion
melted through the shield as if it were a plastic spoon. The lower half of his
face liquefied: the fire consumed plastic, then skin, then muscle. The same
process was repeated with his fingers—the leather gloves were no match for
the inferno that passed over and through them—then tongues of flame licked
across his shoulders and chest. When he crawled away from the flaming
wreckage, I imagine he looked more like a corpse than a living man.
It is unfathomable to me that he was able to move, let alone drag himself
a quarter mile through fields and over ditches. If ever a man needed angels,
it was that man. But against all reason he did it, and—as his father had years
before—huddled outside his wife’s door, unable to knock.
My cousin Kylie was working for my mother that day, filling vials of
essential oil. A few other women worked nearby, weighing dried leaves or
straining tinctures. Kylie heard a soft tap on the back door, as if someone
was bumping it with their elbow. She opened it but has no memory of what
was on the other side. “I’ve blocked it out,” she would later tell me. “I can’t
remember what I saw. I only remember what I thought, which was, He has
no skin.”
My father was carried to the couch. Rescue Remedy—the homeopathic
for shock—was poured into the lipless cavity that had been his mouth. They
gave him lobelia and skullcap for the pain, the same mixture Mother had
given Luke years before. Dad choked on the medicine. He couldn’t swallow.
He’d inhaled the fiery blast, and his insides were charred.
Mother tried to take him to the hospital, but between rasping breaths he
whispered that he’d rather die than see a doctor. The authority of the man
was such that she gave way.
The dead skin was gently cut away and he was slathered in salve—the
same salve Mother had used on Luke’s leg years before—from his waist to
the tip of his head, then bandaged. Mother gave him ice cubes to suck on,
hoping to hydrate him, but the inside of his mouth and throat were so badly
burned, they absorbed no liquid, and without lips or muscles he couldn’t
hold the ice in his mouth. It would slide down his throat and choke him.
They nearly lost him many times that first night. His breathing would
slow, then stop, and my mother—and the heavenly host of women who
worked for her—would fly about, adjusting chakras and tapping pressure
points, anything to coax his brittle lungs to resume their rattle.
That morning was when Audrey called me.
* His heart had stopped twice
during the night, she told me. It would probably be his heart that killed him,
assuming his lungs didn’t give out first. Either way, Audrey was sure he’d be
dead by midday.
I called Nick. I told him I had to go to Idaho for a few days, for a family
thing, nothing serious. He knew I wasn’t telling him something—I could
hear the hurt in his voice that I wouldn’t confide in him—but I put him out
of my mind the moment I hung up the phone.
I stood, keys in hand, hand on the doorknob, and hesitated. The strep.
What if I gave it to Dad? I had been taking the penicillin for nearly three
days. The doctor had said that after twenty-four hours I would no longer be
contagious, but then he was a doctor, and I didn’t trust him.
I waited a day. I took several times the prescribed dose of penicillin, then
called Mother and asked what I should do.
“You should come home,” she said, and her voice broke. “I don’t think
the strep will matter tomorrow.”
I don’t recall the scenery from the drive. My eyes barely registered the
patchwork of corn and potato fields, or the dark hills covered in pine.
Instead I saw my father, the way he’d looked the last time I’d seen him, that
twisted expression. I remembered the searing pitch of my voice as I’d
screamed at him.
Like Kylie, I don’t remember what I saw when I first looked at my father.
I know that when Mother had removed the gauze that morning, she’d found
that his ears were so burned, the skin so glutinous, they had fused to the
syrupy tissue behind them. When I walked through the back door, the first
thing I saw was Mother grasping a butter knife, which she was using to pry
my father’s ears from his skull. I can still picture her gripping the knife, her
eyes fixed, focused, but where my father should be, there’s an aperture in my
memory.
The smell in the room was powerful—of charred flesh, and of comfrey,
mullein and plantain. I watched Mother and Audrey change his remaining
bandages. They began with his hands. His fingers were slimy, coated in a
pale ooze that was either melted skin or pus. His arms were not burned and
neither were his shoulders or back, but a thick swath of gauze ran over his
stomach and chest. When they removed it, I was pleased to see large patches
of raw, angry skin. There were a few craters from where the flames must
have concentrated in jets. They gave off a pungent smell, like meat gone to
rot, and were filled with white pools.
But it was his face that visited my dreams that night. He still had a
forehead and nose. The skin around his eyes and partway down his cheeks
was pink and healthy. But below his nose, nothing was where it should be.
Red, mangled, sagging, it looked like a plastic drama mask that had been
held too close to a candle.
Dad hadn’t swallowed anything—no food, no water—for nearly three
days. Mother called a hospital in Utah and begged them to give her an IV. “I
need to hydrate him,” she said. “He’ll die if he doesn’t get water.”
The doctor said he would send a chopper that very minute but Mother
said no. “Then I can’t help you,” the doctor said. “You’re going to kill him,
and I want no part of it.”
Mother was beside herself. In a final, desperate act, she gave Dad an
enema, pushing the tube in as far as she dared, trying to flush enough liquid
through his rectum to keep him alive. She had no idea if it would work—if
there was even an organ in that part of the body to absorb the water—but it
was the only orifice that hadn’t been scorched.
I slept on the living room floor that night so I could be there, in the room,
when we lost him. I awoke several times to gasps and flights of movements
and murmurs that it had happened again, he’d stopped breathing.
Once, an hour before dawn, his breath left him and I was sure it was the
end: he was dead and would not be raised. I rested my hand on a small patch
of bandages while Audrey and Mother rushed around me, chanting and
tapping. The room was not at peace, or maybe it’s just that I wasn’t. For
years my father and I had been locked in conflict, an endless battle of wills.
I thought I had accepted it, accepted our relationship for what it was. But in
that moment, I realized how much I’d been counting on that conflict coming
to an end, how deeply I believed in a future in which we would be a father
and daughter at peace.
I watched his chest, prayed for him to breathe, but he didn’t. Then too
much time had passed. I was preparing to move away, to let my mother and
sister say goodbye, when he coughed—a brittle, rasping hack that sounded
like crepe paper being crinkled. Then, like Lazarus reanimated, his chest
began to rise and fall.
I told Mother I was leaving. Dad might survive, I said. And if he does,
strep can’t be what kills him.
—
MOTHER’S BUSINESS CAME TO a halt. The women who worked for her stopped
concocting tinctures and bottling oils and instead made vats of salve—a new
recipe, of comfrey, lobelia and plantain, that Mother had concocted
specifically for my father. Mother smeared the salve over Dad’s upper body
twice a day. I don’t remember what other treatments they used, and I don’t
know enough about the energy work to give an account. I know they went
through seventeen gallons of salve in the first two weeks, and that Mother
was ordering gauze in bulk.
Tyler flew in from Purdue. He took over for Mother, changing the
bandages on Dad’s fingers every morning, scraping away the layers of skin
and muscle that had necrotized during the night. It didn’t hurt. The nerves
were dead. “I scraped off so many layers,” Tyler told me, “I was sure that
one morning I’d hit bone.”
Dad’s fingers began to bow, bending unnaturally backward at the joint.
This was because the tendons had begun to shrivel and contract. Tyler tried
to curl Dad’s fingers, to elongate the tendons and prevent the deformity from
becoming permanent, but Dad couldn’t bear the pain.
I came back to Buck’s Peak when I was sure the strep was gone. I sat by
Dad’s bed, dripping teaspoons of water into his mouth with a medical
dropper and feeding him pureed vegetables as if he were a toddler. He rarely
spoke. The pain made it difficult for him to focus; he could hardly get
through a sentence before his mind surrendered to it. Mother offered to buy
him pharmaceuticals, the strongest analgesics she could get her hands on,
but he declined them. This was the Lord’s pain, he said, and he would feel
every part of it.
While I was away, I had scoured every video store within a hundred miles
until I’d found the complete box set of The Honeymooners. I held it up for
Dad. He blinked to show me he’d seen it. I asked if he wanted to watch an
episode. He blinked again. I pushed the first tape into the VCR and sat
beside him, searching his warped face, listening to his soft whimpers, while
on the screen Alice Kramden outfoxed her husband again and again.
* It is possible that my timeline is off here by one or two days. According to some who were there,
although my father was horribly burned, he did not seem in any real danger until the third day,
when the scabbing began, making it difficult to breathe. Dehydration compounded the situation. In
this account, it was then that they feared for his life, and that is when my sister called me, only I
misunderstood and assumed that the explosion had happened the day before.
Dad didn’t leave his bed for two months unless one of my brothers was
carrying him. He peed in a bottle, and the enemas continued. Even after it
became clear that he would live, we had no idea what kind of life it would
be. All we could do was wait, and soon it felt as though everything we did
was just another form of waiting—waiting to feed him, waiting to change his
bandages. Waiting to see how much of our father would grow back.
It was difficult to imagine a man like Dad—proud, strong, physical—
permanently impaired. I wondered how he would adjust if Mother were
forever cutting his food for him; if he could live a happy life if he wasn’t
able to grasp a hammer. So much had been lost.
But mixed in with the sadness, I also felt hope. Dad had always been a
hard man—a man who knew the truth on every subject and wasn’t interested
in what anybody else had to say. We listened to him, never the other way
around: when he was not speaking, he required silence.
The explosion transformed him from lecturer to observer. Speaking was
difficult for him, because of the constant pain but also because his throat
was burned. So he watched, he listened. He lay, hour after hour, day after
day, his eyes alert, his mouth shut.
Within a few weeks, my father—who years earlier had not been able to
guess my age within half a decade—knew about my classes, my boyfriend,
my summer job. I hadn’t told him any of it, but he’d listened to the chatter
between me and Audrey as we changed his bandages, and he’d remembered.
“I’d like to hear more about them classes,” he rasped one morning near
the end of the summer. “It sounds real interesting.”
It felt like a new beginning.
—
DAD WAS STILL BEDRIDDEN when Shawn and Emily announced their
engagement. It was suppertime, and the family was gathered around the
kitchen table, when Shawn said he guessed he’d marry Emily after all.
There was silence while forks scraped plates. Mother asked if he was
serious. He said he wasn’t, that he figured he’d find somebody better before
he actually had to go through with it. Emily sat next to him, wearing a
warped smile.
I didn’t sleep that night. I kept checking the bolt on the door. The present
seemed vulnerable to the past, as if it might be overwhelmed by it, as if I
might blink, and when my eyes opened I would be fifteen.
The next morning Shawn said he and Emily were planning a twenty-mile
horse ride to Bloomington Lake. I surprised both of us by saying I wanted to
go. I felt anxious when I imagined all those hours in the wilderness with
Shawn, but I pushed the anxiety aside. There was something I had to do.
Fifty miles feels like five hundred on a horse, particularly if your body is
more accustomed to a chair than a saddle. When we arrived at the lake,
Shawn and Emily slipped nimbly off their horses and began to make camp;
it was all I could do to unhitch Apollo’s saddle and ease myself onto a fallen
tree. I watched Emily set up the tent we were to share. She was tall and
unthinkably slight, with long, straight hair so blond it was nearly silver.
We built a fire and sang campfire songs. We played cards. Then we went
to our tents. I lay awake in the dark next to Emily, listening to the crickets. I
was trying to imagine how to begin the conversation—how to tell her she
shouldn’t marry my brother—when she spoke. “I want to talk to you about
Shawn,” she said. “I know he’s got some problems.”
“He does,” I said.
“He’s a spiritual man,” Emily said. “God has given him a special calling.
To help people. He told me how he helped Sadie. And how he helped you.”
“He didn’t help me.” I wanted to say more, to explain to Emily what the
bishop had explained to me. But they were his words, not mine. I had no
words. I had come fifty miles to speak, and was mute.
“The devil tempts him more than other men,” Emily said. “Because of his
gifts, because he’s a threat to Satan. That’s why he has problems. Because of
his righteousness.”
She sat up. I could see the outline of her long ponytail in the dark. “He
said he’ll hurt me,” she said. “I know it’s because of Satan. But sometimes
I’m scared of him, I’m scared of what he’ll do.”
I told her she shouldn’t marry someone who scares her, that no one
should, but the words left my lips stillborn. I believed them, but I didn’t
understand them well enough to make them live.
I stared into the darkness, searching it for her face, trying to understand
what power my brother had over her. He’d had that power over me, I knew.
He had some of it still. I was neither under his spell, nor free of it.
“He’s a spiritual man,” she said again. Then she slipped into her sleeping
bag, and I knew the conversation was over.
—
I RETURNED TO BYU a few days before the fall semester. I drove directly to
Nick’s apartment. We’d hardly spoken. Whenever he called, I always
seemed to be needed somewhere to change a bandage or make salve. Nick
knew my father had been burned, but he didn’t know the severity of it. I’d
withheld more information than I’d given, never saying that there had been
an explosion, or that when I “visited” my father it wasn’t in a hospital but in
our living room. I hadn’t told Nick about his heart stopping. I hadn’t
described the gnarled hands, or the enemas, or the pounds of liquefied tissue
we’d scraped off his body.
I knocked and Nick opened the door. He seemed surprised to see me.
“How’s your dad?” he asked after I’d joined him on the sofa.
In retrospect, this was probably the most important moment of our
friendship, the moment I could have done one thing, the better thing, and I
did something else. It was the first time I’d seen Nick since the explosion. I
might have told him everything right then: that my family didn’t believe in
modern medicine; that we were treating the burn at home with salves and
homeopathy; that it had been terrifying, worse than terrifying; that for as
long as I lived I would never forget the smell of charred flesh. I could have
told him all that, could have surrendered the weight, let the relationship
carry it and grow stronger. Instead I kept the burden for myself, and my
friendship with Nick, already anemic, underfed and underused, dwindled in
obsolescence.
I believed I could repair the damage—that now I was back, this would be
my life, and it wouldn’t matter that Nick understood nothing of Buck’s Peak.
But the peak refused to give me up. It clung to me. The black craters in my
father’s chest often materialized on chalkboards, and I saw the sagging
cavity of his mouth on the pages of my textbooks. This remembered world
was somehow more vivid than the physical world I inhabited, and I phased
between them. Nick would take my hand, and for a moment I would be
there with him, feeling the surprise of his skin on mine. But when I looked
at our joined fingers, something would shift so that the hand was not Nick’s.
It was bloody and clawed, not a hand at all.
When I slept, I gave myself wholly to the peak. I dreamed of Luke, of his
eyes rolling back in his head. I dreamed of Dad, of the slow rattle in his
lungs. I dreamed of Shawn, of the moment my wrist had cracked in the
parking lot. I dreamed of myself, limping beside him, laughing that high,
horrible cackle. But in my dreams I had long, silvery hair.
—
THE WEDDING WAS IN SEPTEMBER.
I arrived at the church full of anxious energy, as though I’d been sent
through time from some disastrous future to this moment, when my actions
still had weight and my thoughts, consequences. I didn’t know what I’d been
sent to do, so I wrung my hands and chewed my cheeks, waiting for the
crucial moment. Five minutes before the ceremony, I vomited in the
women’s bathroom.
When Emily said “I do,” the vitality left me. I again became a spirit, and
drifted back to BYU. I stared at the Rockies from my bedroom window and
was struck by how implausible they seemed. Like paintings.
A week after the wedding I broke up with Nick—callously, I’m ashamed
to say. I never told him of my life before, never sketched for him the world
that had invaded and obliterated the one he and I had shared. I could have
explained. I could have said, “That place has a hold on me, which I may
never break.” That would have got to the heart of it. Instead I sank through
time. It was too late to confide in Nick, to take him with me wherever I was
going. So I said goodbye.
I’
d come to BYU to study music, so that one day I could direct a church
choir. But that semester—the fall of my junior year—I didn’t enroll in a
single music course. I couldn’t have explained why I dropped advanced
music theory in favor of geography and comparative politics, or gave up
sight-singing to take History of the Jews. But when I’d seen those courses in
the catalog, and read their titles aloud, I had felt something infinite, and I
wanted a taste of that infinity.
For four months I attended lectures on geography and history and politics.
I learned about Margaret Thatcher and the Thirty-Eighth Parallel and the
Cultural Revolution; I learned about parliamentary politics and electoral
systems around the world. I learned about the Jewish diaspora and the
strange history of The Protocols of the Elders of Zion. By the end of the
semester the world felt big, and it was hard to imagine returning to the
mountain, to a kitchen, or even to a piano in the room next to the kitchen.
This caused a kind of crisis in me. My love of music, and my desire to
study it, had been compatible with my idea of what a woman is. My love of
history and politics and world affairs was not. And yet they called to me.
A few days before finals, I sat for an hour with my friend Josh in an
empty classroom. He was reviewing his applications for law school. I was
choosing my courses for the next semester.
“If you were a woman,” I asked, “would you still study law?”
Josh didn’t look up. “If I were a woman,” he said, “I wouldn’t want to
study it.”
“But you’ve talked about nothing except law school for as long as I’ve
known you,” I said. “It’s your dream, isn’t it?”
“It is,” he admitted. “But it wouldn’t be if I were a woman. Women are
made differently. They don’t have this ambition. Their ambition is for
children.” He smiled at me as if I knew what he was talking about. And I
did. I smiled, and for a few seconds we were in agreement.
Then: “But what if you were a woman, and somehow you felt exactly as
you do now?”
Josh’s eyes fixed on the wall for a moment. He was really thinking about
it. Then he said, “I’d know something was wrong with me.”
I’d been wondering whether something was wrong with me since the
beginning of the semester, when I’d attended my first lecture on world
affairs. I’d been wondering how I could be a woman and yet be drawn to
unwomanly things.
I knew someone must have the answer so I decided to ask one of my
professors. I chose the professor of my Jewish history class, because he was
quiet and soft-spoken. Dr. Kerry was a short man with dark eyes and a
serious expression. He lectured in a thick wool jacket even in hot weather. I
knocked on his office door quietly, as if I hoped he wouldn’t answer, and
soon was sitting silently across from him. I didn’t know what my question
was, and Dr. Kerry didn’t ask. Instead he posed general questions—about
my grades, what courses I was taking. He asked why I’d chosen Jewish
history, and without thinking I blurted that I’d learned of the Holocaust only
a few semesters before and wanted to learn the rest of the story.
“You learned of the Holocaust when?” he said.
“At BYU.”
“They didn’t teach about it in your school?”
“They probably did,” I said. “Only I wasn’t there.”
“Where were you?”
I explained as best I could, that my parents didn’t believe in public
education, that they’d kept us home. When I’d finished, he laced his fingers
as if he were contemplating a difficult problem. “I think you should stretch
yourself. See what happens.”
“Stretch myself how?”
He leaned forward suddenly, as if he’d just had an idea. “Have you heard
of Cambridge?” I hadn’t. “It’s a university in England,” he said. “One of the
best in the world. I organize a study abroad program there for students. It’s
highly competitive and extremely demanding. You might not be accepted,
but if you are, it may give you some idea of your abilities.”
I walked to my apartment wondering what to make of the conversation.
I’d wanted moral advice, someone to reconcile my calling as a wife and
mother with the call I heard of something else. But he’d put that aside. He’d
seemed to say, “First find out what you are capable of, then decide who you
are.”
I applied to the program.
—
EMILY WAS PREGNANT. THE pregnancy was not going well. She’d nearly
miscarried in the first trimester, and now that she was approaching twenty
weeks, she was beginning to have contractions. Mother, who was the
midwife, had given her Saint-John’s-wort and other remedies. The
contractions lessened but continued.
When I arrived at Buck’s Peak for Christmas, I expected to find Emily on
bed rest. She wasn’t. She was standing at the kitchen counter straining herbs,
along with half a dozen other women. She rarely spoke and smiled even
more rarely, just moved about the house carrying vats of cramp bark and
motherwort. She was quiet to the point of invisibility, and after a few
minutes, I forgot she was there.
It had been six months since the explosion, and while Dad was back on
his feet, it was clear he would never be the man he was. He could scarcely
walk across a room without gasping for air, so damaged were his lungs. The
skin on his lower face had regrown, but it was thin and waxy, as if someone
had taken sandpaper and rubbed it to the point of transparency. His ears
were thick with scars. He had thin lips and his mouth drooped, giving him
the haggard appearance of a much older man. But it was his right hand,
more than his face, that drew stares: each finger was frozen in its own pose,
some curled, some bowed, twisting together into a gnarled claw. He could
hold a spoon by wedging it between his index finger, which bowed upward,
and his ring finger, which curved downward, but he ate with difficulty. Still,
I wondered whether skin grafts could have achieved what Mother had with
her comfrey and lobelia salve. It was a miracle, everyone said, so that was
the new name they gave Mother’s recipe: after Dad’s burn it was known as
Miracle Salve.
At dinner my first night on the peak, Dad described the explosion as a
tender mercy from the Lord. “It was a blessing,” he said. “A miracle. God
spared my life and extended to me a great calling. To testify of His power.
To show people there’s another way besides the Medical Establishment.”
I watched as he tried and failed to wedge his knife tightly enough to cut
his roast. “I was never in any danger,” he said. “I’ll prove it to you. As soon
as I can walk across the yard without near passing out, I’ll get a torch and
cut off another tank.”
The next morning when I came out for breakfast, there was a crowd of
women gathered around my father. They listened with hushed voices and
glistening eyes as Dad told of the heavenly visitations he’d received while
hovering between life and death. He had been ministered to by angels, he
said, like the prophets of old. There was something in the way the women
looked at him. Something like adoration.
I watched the women throughout the morning and became aware of the
change my father’s miracle had wrought in them. Before, the women who
worked for my mother had always approached her casually, with matter-of fact questions about their work. Now their speech was soft, admiring.
Dramas broke out between them as they vied for my mother’s esteem, and
for my father’s. The change could be summed up simply: before, they had
been employees; now they were followers.
The story of Dad’s burn had become something of a founding myth: it
was told over and over, to newcomers but also to the old. In fact, it was rare
to spend an afternoon in the house without hearing some kind of recitation
of the miracle, and occasionally these recitations were less than accurate. I
heard Mother tell a room of devoted faces that sixty-five percent of Dad’s
upper body had been burned to the third degree. That was not what I
remembered. In my memory the bulk of the damage had been skin-deep—
his arms, back and shoulders had hardly been burned at all. It was only his
lower face and hands that had been third-degree. But I kept this to myself.
For the first time, my parents seemed to be of one mind. Mother no longer
moderated Dad’s statements after he left the room, no longer quietly gave
her own opinion. She had been transformed by the miracle—transformed
into him. I remembered her as a young midwife, so cautious, so meek about
the lives over which she had such power. There was little of that meekness
in her now. The Lord Himself guided her hands, and no misfortune would
occur except by the will of God.
—
A FEW WEEKS AFTER CHRISTMAS, the University of Cambridge wrote to Dr.
Kerry, rejecting my application. “The competition was very steep,” Dr.
Kerry told me when I visited his office.
I thanked him and stood to go.
“One moment,” he said. “Cambridge instructed me to write if I felt there
were any gross injustices.”
I didn’t understand, so he repeated himself. “I could only help one
student,” he said. “They have offered you a place, if you want it.”
It seemed impossible that I would really be allowed to go. Then I realized
that I would need a passport, and that without a real birth certificate, I was
unlikely to get one. Someone like me did not belong at Cambridge. It was as
if the universe understood this and was trying to prevent the blasphemy of
my going.
I applied in person. The clerk laughed out loud at my Delayed Certificate
of Birth. “Nine years!” she said. “Nine years is not a delay. Do you have any
other documentation?”
“Yes,” I said. “But they have different birth dates. Also, one has a
different name.”
She was still smiling. “Different date and different name? No, that’s not
gonna work. There’s no way you’re gonna get a passport.”
I visited the clerk several more times, becoming more and more
desperate, until, finally, a solution was found. My aunt Debbie visited the
courthouse and swore an affidavit that I was who I said I was. I was issued a
passport.
—
IN FEBRUARY, EMILY GAVE BIRTH. The baby weighed one pound, four ounces.
When Emily had started having contractions at Christmas, Mother had
said the pregnancy would unfold according to God’s will. His will, it turned
out, was that Emily give birth at home at twenty-six weeks’ gestation.
There was a blizzard that night, one of those mighty mountain storms that
clears the roads and closes the towns. Emily was in the advanced stages of
labor when Mother realized she needed a hospital. The baby, which they
named Peter, appeared a few minutes later, slipping from Emily so easily
that Mother said she “caught” him more than delivered him. He was still,
and the color of ash. Shawn thought he was dead. Then Mother felt a tiny
heartbeat—actually she saw his heart beating through a thin film of skin.
My father rushed to the van and began scraping at the snow and ice. Shawn
carried Emily and laid her on the back seat, then Mother placed the baby
against Emily’s chest and covered him, creating a makeshift incubator.
Kangaroo care, she called it later.
My father drove; the storm raged. In Idaho we call it a whiteout: when the
wind whips the snowfall so violently it bleaches the road, covers it as if with
a veil, and you can’t see the asphalt, or the fields or rivers; you can’t see
anything except billows of white. Somehow, skidding through snow and
sleet, they made it to town, but the hospital there was rural, unequipped to
care for such a faint whimper of life. The doctors said they had to get him to
McKay-Dee in Ogden as soon as possible, there was no time. He could not
go by chopper because of the blizzard, so the doctors sent him in an
ambulance. In fact they sent two ambulances, a second in case the first
succumbed to the storm.
Many months would pass, and countless surgeries on his heart and lungs
would be performed, before Shawn and Emily would bring home the little
twig of flesh that I was told was my nephew. By then he was out of danger,
but the doctors said his lungs might never develop fully. He might always be
frail.
Dad said God had orchestrated the birth just as He had orchestrated the
explosion. Mother echoed him, adding that God had placed a veil over her
eyes so she wouldn’t stop the contractions. “Peter was supposed to come
into the world this way,” she said. “He is a gift from God, and God gives His
gifts in whatever way He chooses.”
The first time I saw King’s College, Cambridge, I didn’t think I was
dreaming, but only because my imagination had never produced anything so
grand. My eyes settled on a clock tower with stone carvings. I was led to the
tower, then we passed through it and into the college. There was a lake of
perfectly clipped grass and, across the lake, an ivory-tinted building I
vaguely recognized as Greco-Roman. But it was the Gothic chapel, three
hundred feet long and a hundred feet high, a stone mountain, that dominated
the scene.
I was taken past the chapel and into another courtyard, then up a spiral
staircase. A door was opened, and I was told that this was my room. I was
left to make myself comfortable. The kindly man who’d given me this
instruction did not realize how impossible it was.
Breakfast the next morning was served in a great hall. It was like eating in
a church, the ceiling was cavernous, and I felt under scrutiny, as if the hall
knew I was there and I shouldn’t be. I’d chosen a long table full of other
students from BYU. The women were talking about the clothes they had
brought. Marianne had gone shopping when she learned she’d been
accepted to the program. “You need different pieces for Europe,” she said.
Heather agreed. Her grandmother had paid for her plane ticket, so she’d
spent that money updating her wardrobe. “The way people dress here,” she
said, “it’s more refined. You can’t get away with jeans.”
I thought about rushing to my room to change out of the sweatshirt and
Keds I was wearing, but I had nothing to change into. I didn’t own anything
like what Marianne and Heather wore—bright cardigans accented with
delicate scarves. I hadn’t bought new clothes for Cambridge, because I’d had
to take out a student loan just to pay the fees. Besides, I understood that
even if I had Marianne’s and Heather’s clothes, I wouldn’t know how to
wear them.
Dr. Kerry appeared and announced that we’d been invited to take a tour
of the chapel. We would even be allowed on the roof. There was a general
scramble as we returned our trays and followed Dr. Kerry from the hall. I
stayed near the back of the group as we made our way across the courtyard.
When I stepped inside the chapel, my breath caught in my chest. The
room—if such a space can be called a room—was voluminous, as if it could
hold the whole of the ocean. We were led through a small wooden door,
then up a narrow spiraling staircase whose stone steps seemed numberless.
Finally the staircase opened onto the roof, which was heavily slanted, an
inverted V enclosed by stone parapets. The wind was gusting, rolling clouds
across the sky; the view was spectacular, the city miniaturized, utterly
dwarfed by the chapel. I forgot myself and climbed the slope, then walked
along the ridge, letting the wind take me as I stared out at the expanse of
crooked streets and stone courtyards.
“You’re not afraid of falling,” a voice said. I turned. It was Dr. Kerry. He
had followed me, but he seemed unsteady on his feet, nearly pitching with
every rush of wind.
“We can go down,” I said. I ran down the ridge to the flat walkway near
the buttress. Again Dr. Kerry followed but his steps were strange. Rather
than walk facing forward, he rotated his body and moved sideways, like a
crab. The wind continued its attack. I offered him an arm for the last few
steps, so unsteady did he seem, and he took it.
“I meant it as an observation,” he said when we’d made it down. “Here
you stand, upright, hands in your pockets.” He gestured toward the other
students. “See how they hunch? How they cling to the wall?” He was right.
A few were venturing onto the ridge but they did so cautiously, taking the
same ungainly side steps Dr. Kerry had, tipping and swaying in the wind;
everyone else was holding tightly to the stone parapet, knees bent, backs
arched, as if unsure whether to walk or crawl.
I raised my hand and gripped the wall.
“You don’t need to do that,” he said. “It’s not a criticism.”
He paused, as if unsure he should say more. “Everyone has undergone a
change,” he said. “The other students were relaxed until we came to this
height. Now they are uncomfortable, on edge. You seem to have made the
opposite journey. This is the first time I’ve seen you at home in yourself. It’s
in the way you move: it’s as if you’ve been on this roof all your life.”
A gust of wind swept over the parapet and Dr. Kerry teetered, clutching
the wall. I stepped up onto the ridge so he could flatten himself against the
buttress. He stared at me, waiting for an explanation.
“I’ve roofed my share of hay sheds,” I said finally.
“So your legs are stronger? Is that why you can stand in this wind?”
I had to think before I could answer. “I can stand in this wind, because
I’m not trying to stand in it,” I said. “The wind is just wind. You could
withstand these gusts on the ground, so you can withstand them in the air.
There is no difference. Except the difference you make in your head.”
He stared at me blankly. He hadn’t understood.
“I’m just standing,” I said. “You are all trying to compensate, to get your
bodies lower because the height scares you. But the crouching and the
sidestepping are not natural. You’ve made yourselves vulnerable. If you
could just control your panic, this wind would be nothing.”
“The way it is nothing to you,” he said.
—
I WANTED THE MIND of a scholar, but it seemed that Dr. Kerry saw in me the
mind of a roofer. The other students belonged in a library; I belonged in a
crane.
The first week passed in a blur of lectures. In the second week, every
student was assigned a supervisor to guide their research. My supervisor, I
learned, was the eminent Professor Jonathan Steinberg, a former vice master of a Cambridge college, who was much celebrated for his writings on
the Holocaust.
My first meeting with Professor Steinberg took place a few days later. I
waited at the porter’s lodge until a thin man appeared and, producing a set
of heavy keys, unlocked a wooden door set into the stone. I followed him up
a spiral staircase and into the clock tower itself, where there was a well-lit
room with simple furnishings: two chairs and a wooden table.
I could hear the blood pounding behind my ears as I sat down. Professor
Steinberg was in his seventies but I would not have described him as an old
man. He was lithe, and his eyes moved about the room with probing energy.
His speech was measured and fluid.
“I am Professor Steinberg,” he said. “What would you like to read?”
I mumbled something about historiography. I had decided to study not
history, but historians. I suppose my interest came from the sense of
groundlessness I’d felt since learning about the Holocaust and the civil
rights movement—since realizing that what a person knows about the past is
limited, and will always be limited, to what they are told by others. I knew
what it was to have a misconception corrected—a misconception of such
magnitude that shifting it shifted the world. Now I needed to understand
how the great gatekeepers of history had come to terms with their own
ignorance and partiality. I thought if I could accept that what they had
written was not absolute but was the result of a biased process of
conversation and revision, maybe I could reconcile myself with the fact that
the history most people agreed upon was not the history I had been taught.
Dad could be wrong, and the great historians Carlyle and Macaulay and
Trevelyan could be wrong, but from the ashes of their dispute I could
construct a world to live in. In knowing the ground was not ground at all, I
hoped I could stand on it.
I doubt I managed to communicate any of this. When I finished talking,
Professor Steinberg eyed me for a moment, then said, “Tell me about your
education. Where did you attend school?”
The air was immediately sucked from the room.
“I grew up in Idaho,” I said.
“And you attended school there?”
It occurs to me in retrospect that someone might have told Professor
Steinberg about me, perhaps Dr. Kerry. Or perhaps he perceived that I was
avoiding his question, and that made him curious. Whatever the reason, he
wasn’t satisfied until I had admitted that I’d never been to school.
“How marvelous,” he said, smiling. “It’s as if I’ve stepped into Shaw’s
Pygmalion.”
—
FOR TWO MONTHS I had weekly meetings with Professor Steinberg. I was
never assigned readings. We read only what I asked to read, whether it was a
book or a page.
None of my professors at BYU had examined my writing the way
Professor Steinberg did. No comma, no period, no adjective or adverb was
beneath his interest. He made no distinction between grammar and content,
between form and substance. A poorly written sentence was a poorly
conceived idea, and in his view the grammatical logic was as much in need
of correction. “Tell me,” he would say, “why have you placed this comma
here? What relationship between these phrases are you hoping to establish?”
When I gave my explanation sometimes he would say, “Quite right,” and
other times he would correct me with lengthy explanations of syntax.
After I’d been meeting with Professor Steinberg for a month, I wrote an
essay comparing Edmund Burke with Publius, the persona under which
James Madison, Alexander Hamilton and John Jay had written The
Federalist Papers. I barely slept for two weeks: every moment my eyes were
open, I was either reading or thinking about those texts.
From my father I had learned that books were to be either adored or
exiled. Books that were of God—books written by the Mormon prophets or
the Founding Fathers—were not to be studied so much as cherished, like a
thing perfect in itself. I had been taught to read the words of men like
Madison as a cast into which I ought to pour the plaster of my own mind, to
be reshaped according to the contours of their faultless model. I read them
to learn what to think, not how to think for myself. Books that were not of
God were banished; they were a danger, powerful and irresistible in their
cunning.
To write my essay I had to read books differently, without giving myself
over to either fear or adoration. Because Burke had defended the British
monarchy, Dad would have said he was an agent of tyranny. He wouldn’t
have wanted the book in the house. There was a thrill in trusting myself to
read the words. I felt a similar thrill in reading Madison, Hamilton and Jay,
especially on those occasions when I discarded their conclusions in favor of
Burke’s, or when it seemed to me that their ideas were not really different in
substance, only in form. There were wonderful suppositions embedded in
this method of reading: that books are not tricks, and that I was not feeble.
I finished the essay and sent it to Professor Steinberg. Two days later,
when I arrived for our next meeting, he was subdued. He peered at me from
across the table. I waited for him to say the essay was a disaster, the product
of an ignorant mind, that it had overreached, drawn too many conclusions
from too little material.
“I have been teaching in Cambridge for thirty years,” he said. “And this is
one of the best essays I’ve read.”
I was prepared for insults but not for this.
Professor Steinberg must have said more about the essay but I heard
nothing. My mind was consumed with a wrenching need to get out of that
room. In that moment I was no longer in a clock tower in Cambridge. I was
seventeen, in a red jeep, and a boy I loved had just touched my hand. I
bolted.
I could tolerate any form of cruelty better than kindness. Praise was a
poison to me; I choked on it. I wanted the professor to shout at me, wanted
it so deeply I felt dizzy from the deprivation. The ugliness of me had to be
given expression. If it was not expressed in his voice, I would need to
express it in mine.
I don’t remember leaving the clock tower, or how I passed the afternoon.
That evening there was a black-tie dinner. The hall was lit by candlelight,
which was beautiful, but it cheered me for another reason: I wasn’t wearing
formal clothing, just a black shirt and black pants, and I thought people
might not notice in the dim lighting. My friend Laura arrived late. She
explained that her parents had visited and taken her to France. She had only
just returned. She was wearing a dress of rich purple with crisp pleats in the
skirt. The hemline bounced several inches above her knee, and for a
moment I thought the dress was whorish, until she said her father had
bought it for her in Paris. A gift from one’s father could not be whorish. A
gift from one’s father seemed to me the definitive signal that a woman was
not a whore. I struggled with this dissonance—a whorish dress, gifted to a
loved daughter—until the meal had been finished and the plates cleared
away.
At my next supervision, Professor Steinberg said that when I applied for
graduate school, he would make sure I was accepted to whatever institution
I chose. “Have you visited Harvard?” he said. “Or perhaps you prefer
Cambridge?”
I imagined myself in Cambridge, a graduate student wearing a long black
robe that swished as I strode through ancient corridors. Then I was
hunching in a bathroom, my arm behind my back, my head in the toilet. I
tried to focus on the student but I couldn’t. I couldn’t picture the girl in the
whirling black gown without seeing that other girl. Scholar or whore, both
couldn’t be true. One was a lie.
“I can’t go,” I said. “I can’t pay the fees.”
“Let me worry about the fees,” Professor Steinberg said.
—
IN LATE AUGUST, on our last night in Cambridge, there was a final dinner in
the great hall. The tables were set with more knives, forks and goblets than
I’d ever seen; the paintings on the wall seemed ghostly in the candlelight. I
felt exposed by the elegance and yet somehow made invisible by it. I stared
at the other students as they passed, taking in every silk dress, every heavily
lined eye. I obsessed over the beauty of them.
At dinner I listened to the cheerful chatter of my friends while longing for
the isolation of my room. Professor Steinberg was seated at the high table.
Each time I glanced at him, I felt that old instinct at work in me, tensing my
muscles, preparing me to take flight.
I left the hall the moment dessert was served. It was a relief to escape all
that refinement and beauty—to be allowed to be unlovely and not a point of
contrast. Dr. Kerry saw me leave and followed.
It was dark. The lawn was black, the sky blacker. Pillars of chalky light
reached up from the ground and illuminated the chapel, which glowed,
moonlike, against the night sky.
“You’ve made an impression on Professor Steinberg,” Dr. Kerry said,
falling into step beside me. “I only hope he has made some impression on
you.”
I didn’t understand.
“Come this way,” he said, turning toward the chapel. “I have something to
say to you.”
I walked behind him, noticing the silence of my own footfalls, aware that
my Keds didn’t click elegantly on stone the way the heels worn by other
girls did.
Dr. Kerry said he’d been watching me. “You act like someone who is
impersonating someone else. And it’s as if you think your life depends on
it.”
I didn’t know what to say, so I said nothing.
“It has never occurred to you,” he said, “that you might have as much
right to be here as anyone.” He waited for an explanation.
“I would enjoy serving the dinner,” I said, “more than eating it.”
Dr. Kerry smiled. “You should trust Professor Steinberg. If he says you’re
a scholar—‘pure gold,’ I heard him say—then you are.”
“This is a magical place,” I said. “Everything shines here.”
“You must stop yourself from thinking like that,” Dr. Kerry said, his voice
raised. “You are not fool’s gold, shining only under a particular light.
Whomever you become, whatever you make yourself into, that is who you
always were. It was always in you. Not in Cambridge. In you. You are gold.
And returning to BYU, or even to that mountain you came from, will not
change who you are. It may change how others see you, it may even change
how you see yourself—even gold appears dull in some lighting—but that is
the illusion. And it always was.”
I wanted to believe him, to take his words and remake myself, but I’d
never had that kind of faith. No matter how deeply I interred the memories,
how tightly I shut my eyes against them, when I thought of my self, the
images that came to mind were of that girl, in the bathroom, in the parking
lot.
I couldn’t tell Dr. Kerry about that girl. I couldn’t tell him that the reason
I couldn’t return to Cambridge was that being here threw into great relief
every violent and degrading moment of my life. At BYU I could almost
forget, allow what had been to blend into what was. But the contrast here
was too great, the world before my eyes too fantastical. The memories were
more real—more believable—than the stone spires.
To myself I pretended there were other reasons I couldn’t belong at
Cambridge, reasons having to do with class and status: that it was because I
was poor, had grown up poor. Because I could stand in the wind on the
chapel roof and not tilt. That was the person who didn’t belong in
Cambridge: the roofer, not the whore. I can go to school, I had written in
my journal that very afternoon. And I can buy new clothes. But I am still
Tara Westover. I have done jobs no Cambridge student would do. Dress us
any way you like, we are not the same. Clothes could not fix what was
wrong with me. Something had rotted on the inside, and the stench was too
powerful, the core too rancid, to be covered up by mere dressings.
Whether Dr. Kerry suspected any part of this, I’m not sure. But he
understood that I had fixated on clothes as the symbol of why I didn’t, and
couldn’t, belong. It was the last thing he said to me before he walked away,
leaving me rooted, astonished, beside that grand chapel.
“The most powerful determinant of who you are is inside you,” he said.
“Professor Steinberg says this is Pygmalion. Think of the story, Tara.” He
paused, his eyes fierce, his voice piercing. “She was just a cockney in a nice
dress. Until she believed in herself. Then it didn’t matter what dress she
wore.”
The program ended and I returned to BYU. Campus looked the way it
always had, and it would have been easy to forget Cambridge and settle back
into the life I’d had there. But Professor Steinberg was determined that I not
forget. He sent me an application for something called the Gates Cambridge
Scholarship, which, he explained, was a little like the Rhodes Scholarship,
but for Cambridge instead of Oxford. It would provide full funding for me to
study at Cambridge, including tuition, room and board. As far as I was
concerned it was comically out of reach for someone like me, but he insisted
that it was not, so I applied.
Not long after, I noticed another difference, another small shift. I was
spending an evening with my friend Mark, who studied ancient languages.
Like me, and almost everyone at BYU, Mark was Mormon.
“Do you think people should study church history?” he asked.
“I do,” I said.
“What if it makes them unhappy?”
I thought I knew what he meant, but I waited for him to explain.
“Many women struggle with their faith after they learn about polygamy,”
he said. “My mother did. I don’t think she’s ever understood it.”
“I’ve never understood it, either,” I said.
There was a tense silence. He was waiting for me to say my line: that I
was praying for faith. And I had prayed for it, many, many times.
Perhaps both of us were thinking of our history, or perhaps only I was. I
thought of Joseph Smith, who’d had as many as forty wives. Brigham Young
had had fifty-five wives and fifty-six children. The church had ended the
temporal practice of polygamy in 1890, but it had never recanted the
doctrine. As a child I’d been taught—by my father but also in Sunday
school—that in the fullness of time God would restore polygamy, and in the
afterlife, I would be a plural wife. The number of my sister wives would
depend on my husband’s righteousness: the more nobly he lived, the more
wives he would be given.
I had never made my peace with it. As a girl I had often imagined myself
in heaven, dressed in a white gown, standing in a pearly mist across from my
husband. But when the camera zoomed out there were ten women standing
behind us, wearing the same white dress. In my fantasy I was the first wife
but I knew there was no guarantee of that; I might be hidden anywhere in
the long chain of wives. For as long as I could remember, this image had
been at the core of my idea of paradise: my husband, and his wives. There
was a sting in this arithmetic: in knowing that in the divine calculus of
heaven, one man could balance the equation for countless women.
I remembered my great-great-grandmother. I had first heard her name
when I was twelve, which is the year that, in Mormonism, you cease to be a
child and become a woman. Twelve was the age when lessons in Sunday
school began to include words like purity and chastity. It was also the age
that I was asked, as part of a church assignment, to learn about one of my
ancestors. I asked Mother which ancestor I should choose, and without
thinking she said, “Anna Mathea.” I said the name aloud. It floated off my
tongue like the beginning of a fairy tale. Mother said I should honor Anna
Mathea because she had given me a gift: her voice.
“It was her voice that brought our family to the church,” Mother said.
“She heard Mormon missionaries preaching in the streets of Norway. She
prayed, and God blessed her with faith, with the knowledge that Joseph
Smith was His prophet. She told her father, but he’d heard stories about the
Mormons and wouldn’t allow her to be baptized. So she sang for him. She
sang him a Mormon hymn called ‘O My Father.’ When she finished singing,
her father had tears in his eyes. He said that any religion with music so
beautiful must be the work of God. They were baptized together.”
After Anna Mathea converted her parents, the family felt called by God to
come to America and meet the prophet Joseph. They saved for the journey,
but after two years they could bring only half the family. Anna Mathea was
left behind.
The journey was long and harsh, and by the time they made it to Idaho, to
a Mormon settlement called Worm Creek, Anna’s mother was sick, dying. It
was her last wish to see her daughter again, so her father wrote to Anna,
begging her to take what money she had and come to America. Anna had
fallen in love and was to be married, but she left her fiancé in Norway and
crossed the ocean. Her mother died before she reached the American shore.
The family was now destitute; there was no money to send Anna to her
fiancé, to the marriage she had given up. Anna was a financial burden on her
father, so a bishop persuaded her to marry a rich farmer as his second wife.
His first wife was barren, and she flew into a jealous rage when Anna
became pregnant. Anna worried the first wife might hurt her baby, so she
returned to her father, where she gave birth to twins, though only one would
survive the harsh winter on the frontier.
Mark was still waiting. Then he gave up and mumbled the words I was
supposed to say, that he didn’t understand fully, but that he knew polygamy
was a principle from God.
I agreed. I said the words, then braced myself for a wave of humiliation—
for that image to invade my thoughts, of me, one of many wives standing
behind a solitary, faceless man—but it didn’t come. I searched my mind and
discovered a new conviction there: I would never be a plural wife. A voice
declared this with unyielding finality; the declaration made me tremble.
What if God commanded it? I asked. You wouldn’t do it, the voice
answered. And I knew it was true.
I thought again of Anna Mathea, wondering what kind of world it was in
which she, following a prophet, could leave her lover, cross an ocean, enter a
loveless marriage as a second mistress, then bury her first child, only to have
her granddaughter, in two generations, cross the same ocean an unbeliever. I
was Anna Mathea’s heir: she had given me her voice. Had she not given me
her faith, also?
—
I WAS PUT ON A SHORT LIST for the Gates scholarship. There would be an
interview in February in Annapolis. I had no idea how to prepare. Robin
drove me to Park City, where there was an Ann Taylor discount outlet, and
helped me buy a navy pantsuit and matching loafers. I didn’t own a handbag
so Robin lent me hers.
Two weeks before the interview my parents came to BYU. They had never
visited me before, but they were passing through on their way to Arizona
and stopped for dinner. I took them to the Indian restaurant across the street
from my apartment.
The waitress stared a moment too long at my father’s face, then her eyes
bulged when they dropped to his hands. Dad ordered half the menu. I told
him three mains would be enough, but he winked and said money was not a
problem. It seemed the news of my father’s miraculous healing was
spreading, earning them more and more customers. Mother’s products were
being sold by nearly every midwife and natural healer in the Mountain West.
We waited for the food, and Dad asked about my classes. I said I was
studying French. “That’s a socialist language,” he said, then he lectured for
twenty minutes on twentieth-century history. He said Jewish bankers in
Europe had signed secret agreements to start World War II, and that they
had colluded with Jews in America to pay for it. They had engineered the
Holocaust, he said, because they would benefit financially from worldwide
disorder. They had sent their own people to the gas chambers for money.
These ideas were familiar to me, but it took me a moment to remember
where I’d heard them: in a lecture Dr. Kerry had given on The Protocols of
the Elders of Zion. The Protocols, published in 1903, purported to be a
record of a secret meeting of powerful Jews planning world domination. The
document was discredited as a fabrication but still it spread, fueling anti Semitism in the decades before World War II. Adolf Hitler had written
about the Protocols in Mein Kampf, claiming they were authentic, that they
revealed the true nature of the Jewish people.
Dad was talking loudly, at a volume that would have suited a
mountainside but was thunderous in the small restaurant. People at nearby
tables had halted their own conversations and were sitting in silence,
listening to ours. I regretted having chosen a restaurant so near my
apartment.
Dad moved on from World War II to the United Nations, the European
Union, and the imminent destruction of the world. He spoke as if the three
were synonyms. The curry arrived and I focused my attention on it. Mother
had grown tired of the lecture, and asked Dad to talk about something else.
“But the world is about to end!” he said. He was shouting now.
“Of course it is,” Mother said. “But let’s not discuss it over dinner.”
I put down my fork and stared at them. Of all the strange statements from
the past half hour, for some reason this was the one that shocked me. The
mere fact of them had never shocked me before. Everything they did had
always made sense to me, adhering to a logic I understood. Perhaps it was
the backdrop: Buck’s Peak was theirs and it camouflaged them, so that when
I saw them there, surrounded by the loud, sharp relics of my childhood, the
setting seemed to absorb them. At least it absorbed the noise. But here, so
near the university, they seemed so unreal as to be almost mythic.
Dad looked at me, waiting for me to give an opinion, but I felt alienated
from myself. I didn’t know who to be. On the mountain I slipped
thoughtlessly into the voice of their daughter and acolyte. But here, I
couldn’t seem to find the voice that, in the shadow of Buck’s Peak, came
easily.
We walked to my apartment and I showed them my room. Mother shut
the door, revealing a poster of Martin Luther King Jr. that I’d put up four
years before, when I’d learned of the civil rights movement.
“Is that Martin Luther King?” Dad said. “Don’t you know he had ties to
communism?” He chewed the waxy tissue where his lips had been.
They departed soon after to drive through the night. I watched them go,
then took out my journal. It’s astonishing that I used to believe all this
without the slightest suspicion, I wrote. The whole world was wrong; only
Dad was right.
I thought of something Tyler’s wife, Stefanie, had told me over the phone
a few days before. She said it had taken her years to convince Tyler to let her
immunize their children, because some part of him still believed vaccines
are a conspiracy by the Medical Establishment. Remembering that now,
with Dad’s voice still ringing in my ears, I sneered at my brother. He’s a
scientist! I wrote. How can he not see beyond their paranoia! I reread what
I had written, and as I did so my scorn gave way to a sense of irony. Then
again, I wrote. Perhaps I could mock Tyler with more credibility if I had not
remembered, as I did just now, that to this day I have never been
immunized.
—
MY INTERVIEW FOR THE Gates scholarship took place at St. John’s College in
Annapolis. The campus was intimidating, with its immaculate lawns and
crisp colonial architecture. I sat nervously in the corridor, waiting to be
called in for my interview; I felt stiff in the pantsuit and clung awkwardly to
Robin’s handbag. But in the end, Professor Steinberg had written such a
powerful letter of recommendation that there was little left for me to do.
I received confirmation the next day: I’d won the scholarship.
The phone calls began—from BYU’s student paper and the local news. I
did half a dozen interviews. I was on TV. I awoke one morning to find my
picture plastered on BYU’s home page. I was the third BYU student ever to
win a Gates scholarship, and the university was taking full advantage of the
press. I was asked about my high school experience, and which of my grade
school teachers had prepared me for my success. I dodged, I parried, I lied
when I had to. I didn’t tell a single reporter that I’d never gone to school.
I didn’t know why I couldn’t tell them. I just couldn’t stand the thought of
people patting me on the back, telling me how impressive I was. I didn’t
want to be Horatio Alger in someone’s tear-filled homage to the American
dream. I wanted my life to make sense, and nothing in that narrative made
sense to me.
—
A MONTH BEFORE MY graduation, I visited Buck’s Peak. Dad had read the
articles about my scholarship, and what he said was, “You didn’t mention
home school. I’d think you’d be more grateful that your mother and I took
you out of them schools, seeing how it’s worked out. You should be telling
people that’s what done it: home school.”
I said nothing. Dad took it as an apology.
He disapproved of my going to Cambridge. “Our ancestors risked their
lives to cross the ocean, to escape those socialist countries. And what do you
do? You turn around and go back?”
Again, I said nothing.
“I’m looking forward to your graduation,” he said. “The Lord has a few
choice rebukes for me to give them professors.”
“You will not,” I said quietly.
“If the Lord moves me, I will stand and speak.”
“You will not,” I repeated.
“I won’t go anywhere that the Lord’s spirit isn’t welcome.”
That was the conversation. I hoped it would blow over, but Dad was so
hurt that I hadn’t mentioned homeschooling in my interviews that this new
wound festered.
There was a dinner the night before my graduation where I was to receive
the “most outstanding undergraduate” award from the history department. I
waited for my parents at the entrance, but they never appeared. I called
Mother, thinking they were running late. She said they weren’t coming. I
went to the dinner and was presented with a plaque. My table had the only
empty seats in the hall. The next day there was a luncheon for honors
graduates, and I was seated with the college dean and the director of the
honors program. Again, there were two empty seats. I said my parents had
had car trouble.
I phoned my mother after the luncheon.
“Your father won’t come unless you apologize,” she said. “And I won’t,
either.”
I apologized. “He can say whatever he wants. But please come.”
They missed most of the ceremony; I don’t know if they saw me accept
my diploma. What I remember is waiting with my friends before the music
began, watching their fathers snap pictures and their mothers fix their hair. I
remember that my friends were wearing colorful leis and recently gifted
jewelry.
After the ceremony I stood alone on the lawn, watching the other students
with their families. Eventually I saw my parents. Mother hugged me. My
friend Laura snapped two photos. One is of me and Mother, smiling our
forced smiles; the other is of me wedged between my parents, looking
squeezed, under pressure.
I was leaving the Mountain West that night. I had packed before
graduation. My apartment was empty, my bags by the door. Laura had
volunteered to drive me to the airport, but my parents asked if they could
take me.
I expected them to drop me at the curb, but Dad insisted that they walk
with me through the airport. They waited while I checked my bags, then
followed me to the security gate. It was as if Dad wanted to give me until the
last second to change my mind. We walked in silence. When we arrived at
security I hugged them both and said goodbye. I removed my shoes, laptop,
camera, then I passed through the checkpoint, reassembled my pack, and
headed for the terminal.
It was only then that I glanced back and saw Dad, still standing at the
checkpoint, watching me walk away, his hands in his pockets, his shoulders
slumping, his mouth slackened. I waved and he stepped forward, as if to
follow, and I was reminded of the moment, years before, when power lines
had covered the station wagon, with Mother inside it, and Dad had stood
next to her, exposed.
He was still holding that posture when I turned the corner. That image of
my father will always stay with me: that look on his face, of love and fear
and loss. I knew why he was afraid. He’d let it slip my last night on Buck’s
Peak, the same night he’d said he wouldn’t come to see me graduate.
“If you’re in America,” he’d whispered, “we can come for you. Wherever
you are. I’ve got a thousand gallons of fuel buried in the field. I can fetch
you when The End comes, bring you home, make you safe. But if you cross
the ocean…”
PART THREE
A stone gate barred the entrance to Trinity College. Cut into the gate was a
small wooden door. I stepped through it. A porter in a black overcoat and
bowler hat showed me around the college, leading me through Great Court,
the largest of the courtyards. We walked through a stone passageway and
into a covered corridor whose stone was the color of ripe wheat.
“This is the north cloister,” the porter said. “It is here that Newton
stomped his foot to measure the echo, calculating the speed of sound for the
first time.”
We returned to the Great Gate. My room was directly opposite it, up three
flights of stairs. After the porter left I stood, bookended by my suitcases, and
stared out my little window at the mythic stone gate and its otherworldly
battlements. Cambridge was just as I remembered: ancient, beautiful. I was
different. I was not a visitor, not a guest. I was a member of the university.
My name was painted on the door. According to the paperwork, I belonged
here.
I dressed in dark colors for my first lecture, hoping I wouldn’t stand out,
but even so I didn’t think I looked like the other students. I certainly didn’t
sound like them, and not just because they were British. Their speech had a
lilting cadence that made me think of singing more than speaking. To my
ears they sounded refined, educated; I had a tendency to mumble, and when
nervous, to stutter.
I chose a seat around the large square table and listened as the two
students nearest me discussed the lecture topic, which was Isaiah Berlin’s
two concepts of liberty. The student next to me said he’d studied Isaiah
Berlin at Oxford; the other said he’d already heard this lecturer’s remarks on
Berlin when he was an undergraduate at Cambridge. I had never heard of
Isaiah Berlin.
The lecturer began his presentation. He spoke calmly but moved through
the material quickly, as if he assumed we were already familiar with it. This
was confirmed by the other students, most of whom were not taking notes. I
scribbled down every word.
“So what are Isaiah Berlin’s two concepts?” the lecturer asked. Nearly
everyone raised a hand. The lecturer called on the student who had studied
at Oxford. “Negative liberty,” he said, “is the freedom from external
obstacles or constraints. An individual is free in this sense if they are not
physically prevented from taking action.” I was reminded for a moment of
Richard, who had always seemed able to recite with exactness anything he’d
ever read.
“Very good,” the lecturer said. “And the second?”
“Positive liberty,” another student said, “is freedom from internal
constraints.”
I wrote this definition in my notes, but I didn’t understand it.
The lecturer tried to clarify. He said positive liberty is self-mastery—the
rule of the self, by the self. To have positive liberty, he explained, is to take
control of one’s own mind; to be liberated from irrational fears and beliefs,
from addictions, superstitions and all other forms of self-coercion.
I had no idea what it meant to self-coerce. I looked around the room. No
one else seemed confused. I was one of the few students taking notes. I
wanted to ask for further explanation, but something stopped me—the
certainty that to do so would be to shout to the room that I didn’t belong
there.
After the lecture, I returned to my room, where I stared out my window at
the stone gate with its medieval battlements. I thought of positive liberty,
and of what it might mean to self-coerce, until my head thrummed with a
dull ache.
I called home. Mother answered. Her voice rose with excitement when
she recognized my weepy “Hello, Mom.” I told her I shouldn’t have come to
Cambridge, that I didn’t understand anything. She said she’d been muscle testing and had discovered that one of my chakras was out of balance. She
could adjust it, she said. I reminded her that I was five thousand miles away.
“That doesn’t matter,” she said. “I’ll adjust the chakra on Audrey and
wing it to you.”
“You’ll what it to me?”
“Wing it,” she said. “Distance is nothing to living energy. I can send the
corrected energy to you from here.”
“How fast does energy travel?” I asked. “At the speed of sound, or is it
more like a jetliner? Does it fly direct, or will it have to lay over in
Minneapolis?”
Mother laughed and hung up.
—
I STUDIED MOST MORNINGS in the college library, near a small window. I was
there on a particular morning when Drew, a friend from BYU, sent me a
song via email. He said it was a classic but I had never heard of it, nor of the
singer. I played the song through my headphones. It gripped me
immediately. I listened to it over and over while staring out at the north
cloister.
Emancipate yourselves from mental slavery
None but ourselves can free our minds
I scratched those lines into notebooks, into the margins of the essays I
was writing. I wondered about them when I should have been reading. From
the Internet I learned about the cancer that had been discovered on Bob
Marley’s foot. I also learned that Marley had been a Rastafarian, and that
Rastafari believe in a “whole body,” which is why he had refused surgery to
amputate the toe. Four years later, at age thirty-six, he died.
Emancipate yourselves from mental slavery. Marley had written that line
a year before his death, while an operable melanoma was, at that moment,
metastasizing to his lungs, liver, stomach and brain. I imagined a greedy
surgeon with sharp teeth and long, skeletal fingers urging Marley to have the
amputation. I shrank from this frightening image of the doctor and his
corrupt medicine, and only then did I understand, as I had not before, that
although I had renounced my father’s world, I had never quite found the
courage to live in this one.
I flipped through my notebook to the lecture on negative and positive
liberty. In a blank corner I scratched the line, None but ourselves can free
our minds. Then I picked up my phone and dialed.
“I need to get my vaccinations,” I told the nurse.
—
I ATTENDED A SEMINAR on Wednesday afternoons, where I noticed two
women, Katrina and Sophie, who nearly always sat together. I never spoke to
them until one afternoon a few weeks before Christmas, when they asked if
I’d like to get a coffee. I’d never “gotten a coffee” before—I’d never even
tasted coffee, because it is forbidden by the church—but I followed them
across the street and into a café. The cashier was impatient so I chose at
random. She passed me a doll-sized cup with a tablespoon of mud-colored
liquid in it, and I looked longingly at the foamy mugs Katrina and Sophie
carried to our table. They debated concepts from the lecture; I debated
whether to drink my coffee.
They used complex phrases with ease. Some of them, like “the second
wave,” I’d heard before even if I didn’t know what they meant; others, like
“the hegemonic masculinity,” I couldn’t get my tongue around let alone my
mind. I’d taken several sips of the grainy, acrid fluid before I understood that
they were talking about feminism. I stared at them as if they were behind
glass. I’d never heard anyone use the word “feminism” as anything but a
reprimand. At BYU, “You sound like a feminist” signaled the end of the
argument. It also signaled that I had lost.
I left the café and went to the library. After five minutes online and a few
trips to the stacks, I was sitting in my usual place with a large pile of books
written by what I now understood to be second-wave writers—Betty
Friedan, Germaine Greer, Simone de Beauvoir. I read only a few pages of
each book before slamming it shut. I’d never seen the word “vagina” printed
out, never said it aloud.
I returned to the Internet and then to the shelves, where I exchanged the
books of the second wave for those that preceded the first—Mary
Wollstonecraft and John Stuart Mill. I read through the afternoon and into
the evening, developing for the first time a vocabulary for the uneasiness I’d
felt since childhood.
From the moment I had first understood that my brother Richard was a
boy and I was a girl, I had wanted to exchange his future for mine. My
future was motherhood; his, fatherhood. They sounded similar but they were
not. To be one was to be a decider. To preside. To call the family to order. To
be the other was to be among those called.
I knew my yearning was unnatural. This knowledge, like so much of my
self-knowledge, had come to me in the voice of people I knew, people I
loved. All through the years that voice had been with me, whispering,
wondering, worrying. That I was not right. That my dreams were
perversions. That voice had many timbres, many tones. Sometimes it was
my father’s voice; more often it was my own.
I carried the books to my room and read through the night. I loved the
fiery pages of Mary Wollstonecraft, but there was a single line written by
John Stuart Mill that, when I read it, moved the world: “It is a subject on
which nothing final can be known.” The subject Mill had in mind was the
nature of women. Mill claimed that women have been coaxed, cajoled,
shoved and squashed into a series of feminine contortions for so many
centuries, that it is now quite impossible to define their natural abilities or
aspirations.
Blood rushed to my brain; I felt an animating surge of adrenaline, of
possibility, of a frontier being pushed outward. Of the nature of women,
nothing final can be known. Never had I found such comfort in a void, in the
black absence of knowledge. It seemed to say: whatever you are, you are
woman.
—
IN DECEMBER, AFTER I had submitted my last essay, I took a train to London
and boarded a plane. Mother, Audrey and Emily picked me up at the airport
in Salt Lake City, and together we skidded onto the interstate. It was nearly
midnight when the mountain came into view. I could only just make out her
grand form against the inky sky.
When I entered the kitchen I noticed a gaping hole in the wall, which led
to a new extension Dad was building. Mother walked with me through the
hole and switched on the light.
“Amazing, isn’t it?” she said. “Amazing” was the word.
It was a single massive room the size of the chapel at church, with a
vaulted ceiling that rose some sixteen feet into the air. The size of the room
was so ridiculous, it took me a moment to notice the decor. The walls were
exposed Sheetrock, which contrasted spectacularly with the wood paneling
on the vaulted ceiling. Crimson suede sofas sat cordially next to the stained
upholstery love seat my father had dragged in from the dump many years
before. Thick rugs with intricate patterns covered half the floor, while the
other half was raw cement. There were several pianos, only one of which
looked playable, and a television the size of a dining table. The room suited
my father perfectly: it was larger than life and wonderfully incongruous.
Dad had always said he wanted to build a room the size of a cruise ship
but I’d never thought he’d have the money. I looked to Mother for an
explanation but it was Dad who answered. The business was a roaring
success, he explained. Essential oils were popular, and Mother had the best
on the market. “Our oils are so good,” he said, “we’ve started eating into the
profits of the large corporate producers. They know all about them
Westovers in Idaho.” Dad told me that one company had been so alarmed by
the success of Mother’s oils, they had offered to buy her out for an
astonishing three million dollars. My parents hadn’t even considered it.
Healing was their calling. No amount of money could tempt them. Dad
explained that they were taking the bulk of their profits and reconsecrating
them to God in the form of supplies—food, fuel, maybe even a real bomb
shelter. I suppressed a grin. From what I could tell, Dad was on track to
become the best-funded lunatic in the Mountain West.
Richard appeared on the stairwell. He was finishing his undergraduate
degree in chemistry at Idaho State. He’d come home for Christmas, and he’d
brought his wife, Kami, and their one-month-old son, Donavan. When I’d
met Kami a year before, just before the wedding, I’d been struck by how
normal she was. Like Tyler’s wife, Stefanie, Kami was an outsider: she was
a Mormon, but she was what Dad would have called “mainstream.” She
thanked Mother for her herbal advice but seemed oblivious to the
expectation that she renounce doctors. Donavan had been born in a hospital.
I wondered how Richard was navigating the turbulent waters between his
normal wife and his abnormal parents. I watched him closely that night, and
to me it seemed he was trying to live in both worlds, to be a loyal adherent
to all creeds. When my father condemned doctors as minions of Satan,
Richard turned to Kami and gave a small laugh, as if Dad were joking. But
when my father’s eyebrows rose, Richard’s expression changed to one of
serious contemplation and accord. He seemed in a state of constant
transition, phasing in and out of dimensions, unsure whether to be my
father’s son or his wife’s husband.
—
MOTHER WAS OVERWHELMED WITH holiday orders, so I passed my days on
Buck’s Peak just as I had as a child: in the kitchen, making homeopathics. I
poured the distilled water and added the drops from the base formula, then
passed the tiny glass bottle through the ring made by my thumb and index
fingers, counting to fifty or a hundred, then moving on to the next. Dad
came in for a drink of water. He smiled when he saw me.
“Who knew we’d have to send you to Cambridge to get you in the kitchen
where you belong?” he said.
In the afternoons, Shawn and I saddled the horses and fought our way up
the mountain, the horses half-jumping to clamber through snowdrifts that
reached their bellies. The mountain was beautiful and crisp; the air smelled
of leather and pine. Shawn talked about the horses, about their training, and
about the colts he expected in the spring, and I remembered that he was
always at his best when he was with his horses.
I had been home about a week when the mountain was gripped by an
intense cold spell. The temperature plunged, dropping to zero, then dropping
further still. We put the horses away, knowing that if they worked up a
sweat, it would turn to ice on their backs. The trough froze solid. We broke
the ice but it refroze quickly, so we carried buckets of water to each horse.
That night everyone stayed indoors. Mother was blending oils in the
kitchen. Dad was in the extension, which I had begun to jokingly call the
Chapel. He was lying on the crimson sofa, a Bible resting on his stomach,
while Kami and Richard played hymns on the piano. I sat with my laptop on
the love seat, near Dad, and listened to the music. I had just begun a
message to Drew when something struck the back door. The door burst
open, and Emily flew into the room.
Her thin arms were wrapped around her body and she was shaking,
gasping for breath. She wore no coat, no shoes, nothing but jeans, an old
pair I’d left behind, and one of my worn T-shirts. Mother helped her to the
sofa, wrapping her in the nearest blanket. Emily bawled, and for several
minutes not even Mother could get her to say what had happened. Was
everyone all right? Where was Peter? He was fragile, half the size he should
have been, and he wore oxygen tubes because his lungs had never fully
developed. Had his tiny lungs collapsed, his breathing stopped?
The story came out haltingly, between erratic sobs and the clattering of
teeth. From what I could tell, when Emily had gone to Stokes that afternoon
to buy groceries, she had returned home with the wrong crackers for Peter.
Shawn had exploded. “How can he grow if you can’t buy the right food!” he
had screamed, then he’d gathered her up and flung her from their trailer, into
a snowbank. She’d pounded on the door, begging to be let in, then she’d run
up the hillside to the house. I stared at her bare feet as she said this. They
were so red, they looked as if they’d been burned.
My parents sat with Emily on the sofa, one on each side of her, patting
her shoulders and squeezing her hands. Richard paced a few feet behind
them. He seemed frustrated, anxious, as if he wanted to explode into action
and was only just being held in check.
Kami was still seated at the piano. She was staring at the group huddled
on the couch, confused. She had not understood Emily. She did not
understand why Richard was pacing, or why he paused every few seconds to
glance at Dad, waiting for a word or gesture—any signal of what should be
done.
I looked at Kami and felt a tightening in my chest. I resented her for
witnessing this. I imagined myself in Emily’s place, which was easy to do—
I couldn’t stop myself from doing it—and in a moment I was in a parking
lot, laughing my high-pitched cackle, trying to convince the world that my
wrist wasn’t breaking. Before I knew what I was doing I had crossed the
room. I grasped my brother’s arm and pulled him with me to the piano.
Emily was still sobbing, and I used her sobs to muffle my whispers. I told
Kami that what we were witnessing was private, and that Emily would be
embarrassed by it tomorrow. For Emily’s sake, I said, we should all go to
our rooms and leave it in Dad’s hands.
Kami stood. She had decided to trust me. Richard hesitated, giving Dad a
long look, then he followed her from the room.
I walked with them down the hallway then I doubled back. I sat at the
kitchen table and watched the clock. Five minutes passed, then ten. Come
on, Shawn, I chanted under my breath. Come now.
I’d convinced myself that if Shawn appeared in the next few minutes, it
would be to make sure Emily had made it to the house—that she hadn’t
slipped on the ice and broken a leg, wasn’t freezing to death in a field. But
he didn’t come.
Twenty minutes later, when Emily finally stopped shaking, Dad picked up
the phone. “Come get your wife!” he shouted into it. Mother was cradling
Emily’s head against her shoulder. Dad returned to the sofa and patted
Emily’s arm. As I stared at the three of them huddling together, I had the
impression that all of this had happened before, and that everyone’s part was
well rehearsed. Even mine.
It would be many years before I would understand what had happened
that night, and what my role in it had been. How I had opened my mouth
when I should have stayed silent, and shut it when I should have spoken out.
What was needed was a revolution, a reversal of the ancient, brittle roles
we’d been playing out since my childhood. What was needed—what Emily
needed—was a woman emancipated from pretense, a woman who could
show herself to be a man. Voice an opinion. Take action in scorn of
deference. A father.
The French doors my father had installed squawked as they opened.
Shawn shuffled in wearing heavy boots and a thick winter coat. Peter
emerged from the folds of thick wool, where Shawn had been shielding him
from the cold, and reached out for Emily. She clung to him. Dad stood. He
motioned for Shawn to take the seat next to Emily. I stood and went to my
room, pausing to take a last look at my father, who was inhaling deeply,
readying himself to deliver a lengthy lecture.
“It was very stern,” Mother assured me twenty minutes later, when she
appeared at my door asking if I could lend Emily a pair of shoes and a coat.
I fetched them and watched from the kitchen as she disappeared, tucked
under my brother’s arm.
The day before I returned to England, I drove seven miles along the
mountain range, then turned onto a narrow dirt road and stopped in front of
a powder-blue house. I parked behind an RV that was nearly as large as the
house itself. I knocked; my sister answered.
She stood in the doorway in flannel pajamas, a toddler on her hip and two
small girls clinging to her leg. Her son, about six, stood behind her. Audrey
stepped aside to let me pass, but her movements were stiff, and she avoided
looking directly at me. We’d spent little time together since she’d married.
I moved into the house, stopping abruptly in the entryway when I saw a
three-foot hole in the linoleum that plunged to the basement. I walked past
the hole and into the kitchen, which was filled with the scent of our
mother’s oils—birch, eucalyptus, ravensara.
The conversation was slow, halting. Audrey asked me no questions about
England or Cambridge. She had no frame of reference for my life, so we
talked about hers—how the public school system was corrupt so she was
teaching her children herself, at home. Like me, Audrey had never attended
a public school. When she was seventeen, she had made a fleeting effort to
get her GED. She had even enlisted the help of our cousin Missy, who had
come up from Salt Lake City to tutor her. Missy had worked with Audrey
for an entire summer, at the end of which she’d declared that Audrey’s
education hovered somewhere between the fourth- and fifth-grade levels,
and that a GED was out of the question. I chewed my lip and stared at her
daughter, who had brought me a drawing, wondering what education she
could hope to receive from a mother who had none herself.
We made breakfast for the children, then played with them in the snow.
We baked, we watched crime dramas and designed beaded bracelets. It was
as if I had stepped through a mirror and was living a day in the life I might
have had, if I’d stayed on the mountain. But I hadn’t stayed. My life had
diverged from my sister’s, and it felt as though there was no common
ground between us. The hours passed; it was late afternoon; and still she felt
distant from me, still she refused to meet my gaze.
I had brought a small porcelain tea set for her children, and when they
began to quarrel over the teapot, I gathered up the pieces. The oldest girl
reminded me that she was five now, which she said was too old to have a toy
taken away. “If you act like a child,” I said, “I’ll treat you like one.”
I don’t know why I said it; I suppose Shawn was on my mind. I regretted
the words even as they left my lips, hated myself for saying them. I turned to
pass the tea set to my sister, so she could administer justice however she saw
fit, but when I saw her expression I nearly dropped it. Her mouth hung open
in a perfect circle.
“Shawn used to say that,” she said, fixing her eyes on mine.
That moment would stay with me. I would remember it the next day,
when I boarded a plane in Salt Lake City, and it would still be on my mind
when I landed in London. It was the shock of it that I couldn’t shake.
Somehow, it had never occurred to me that my sister might have lived my
life before I did.
—
THAT TERM, I PRESENTED myself to the university like resin to a sculptor. I
believed I could be remade, my mind recast. I forced myself to befriend
other students, clumsily introducing myself again and again until I had a
small circle of friends. Then I set out to obliterate the barriers that separated
me from them. I tasted red wine for the first time, and my new friends
laughed at my pinched face. I discarded my high-necked blouses and began
to wear more fashionable cuts—fitted, often sleeveless, with less restrictive
necklines. In photos from this period I’m struck by the symmetry: I look
like everyone else.
In April I began to do well. I wrote an essay on John Stuart Mill’s concept
of self-sovereignty, and my supervisor, Dr. David Runciman, said that if my
dissertation was of the same quality, I might be accepted to Cambridge for a
PhD. I was stunned: I, who had sneaked into this grand place as an
impostor, might now enter through the front door. I set to work on my
dissertation, again choosing Mill as the topic.
One afternoon near the end of term, when I was eating lunch in the
library cafeteria, I recognized a group of students from my program. They
were seated together at a small table. I asked if I could join them, and a tall
Italian named Nic nodded. From the conversation I gathered that Nic had
invited the others to visit him in Rome during the spring holiday. “You can
come, too,” he said.
We handed in our final essays for the term, then boarded a plane. On our
first evening in Rome, we climbed one of the seven hills and looked out over
the metropolis. Byzantine domes hovered over the city like rising balloons.
It was nearly dusk; the streets were bathed in amber. It wasn’t the color of a
modern city, of steel, glass and concrete. It was the color of sunset. It didn’t
look real. Nic asked me what I thought of his home, and that was all I could
say: it didn’t look real.
At breakfast the next morning, the others talked about their families.
Someone’s father was a diplomat; another’s was an Oxford don. I was asked
about my parents. I said my father owned a junkyard.
Nic took us to the conservatory where he’d studied violin. It was in the
heart of Rome and was richly furnished, with a grand staircase and resonant
halls. I tried to imagine what it would have been like to study in such a
place, to walk across marble floors each morning and, day after day, come to
associate learning with beauty. But my imagination failed me. I could only
imagine the school as I was experiencing it now, as a kind of museum, a
relic from someone else’s life.
For two days we explored Rome, a city that is both a living organism and
a fossil. Bleached structures from antiquity lay like dried bones, embedded
in pulsating cables and thrumming traffic, the arteries of modern life. We
visited the Pantheon, the Roman Forum, the Sistine Chapel. My instinct was
to worship, to venerate. That was how I felt toward the whole city: that it
should be behind glass, adored from a distance, never touched, never
altered. My companions moved through the city differently, aware of its
significance but not subdued by it. They were not hushed by the Trevi
Fountain; they were not silenced by the Colosseum. Instead, as we moved
from one relic to the next, they debated philosophy—Hobbes and Descartes,
Aquinas and Machiavelli. There was a kind of symbiosis in their
relationship to these grand places: they gave life to the ancient architecture
by making it the backdrop of their discourse, by refusing to worship at its
altar as if it were a dead thing.
On the third night there was a rainstorm. I stood on Nic’s balcony and
watched streaks of lightning race across the sky, claps of thunder chasing
them. It was like being on Buck’s Peak, to feel such power in the earth and
sky.
The next morning was cloudless. We took a picnic of wine and pastries to
the grounds of the Villa Borghese. The sun was hot, the pastries ambrosial.
I could not remember ever feeling more present. Someone said something
about Hobbes, and without thinking I recited a line from Mill. It seemed the
natural thing, to bring this voice from the past into a moment so saturated
with the past already, even if the voice was mixed with my own. There was a
pause while everyone checked to see who had spoken, then someone asked
which text the line was from, and the conversation moved forward.
For the rest of the week, I experienced Rome as they did: as a place of
history, but also as a place of life, of food and traffic and conflict and
thunder. The city was no longer a museum; it was as vivid to me as Buck’s
Peak. The Piazza del Popolo. The Baths of Caracalla. Castel Sant’Angelo.
These became as real to my mind as the Princess, the red railway car, the
Shear. The world they represented, of philosophy, science, literature—an
entire civilization—took on a life that was distinct from the life I had
known. At the Galleria Nazionale d’Arte Antica, I stood before Caravaggio’s
Judith Beheading Holofernes and did not once think about chickens.
I don’t know what caused the transformation, why suddenly I could
engage with the great thinkers of the past, rather than revere them to the
point of muteness. But there was something about that city, with its white
marble and black asphalt, crusted with history, ablaze in traffic lights, that
showed me I could admire the past without being silenced by it.
I was still breathing in the fustiness of ancient stone when I arrived in
Cambridge. I rushed up the staircase, anxious to check my email, knowing
there would be a message from Drew. When I opened my laptop, I saw that
Drew had written, but so had someone else: my sister.
—
I OPENED AUDREY’S MESSAGE. It was written in one long paragraph, with little
punctuation and many spelling errors, and at first I fixated on these
grammatical irregularities as a way to mute the text. But the words would
not be hushed; they shouted at me from the screen.
Audrey said she should have stopped Shawn many years ago, before he
could do to me what he’d done to her. She said that when she was young,
she’d wanted to tell Mother, to ask for help, but she’d thought Mother
wouldn’t believe her. She’d been right. Before her wedding, she’d
experienced nightmares and flashbacks, and she’d told Mother about them.
Mother had said the memories were false, impossible. I should have helped
you, Audrey wrote. But when my own mother didn’t believe me, I stopped
believing myself.
*1
It was a mistake she was going to correct. I believe God will hold me
accountable if I don’t stop Shawn from hurting anyone else, she wrote. She
was going to confront him, and our parents, and she was asking me to stand
with her. I am doing this with or without you. But without you, I will
probably lose.
I sat in the dark for a long time. I resented her for writing me. I felt she
had torn me from one world, one life, where I was happy, and dragged me
back into another.
I typed a response. I told her she was right, that of course we should stop
Shawn, but I asked her to do nothing until I could return to Idaho. I don’t
know why I asked her to wait, what benefit I thought time would yield. I
don’t know what I thought would happen when we talked to our parents, but
I understood instinctively what was at stake. As long as we had never asked,
it was possible to believe that they would help. To tell them was to risk the
unthinkable: it was to risk learning that they already knew.
Audrey did not wait, not even a day. The next morning she showed my
email to Mother. I cannot imagine the details of that conversation, but I
know that for Audrey it must have been a tremendous relief, laying my
words before our mother, finally able to say, I’m not crazy. It happened to
Tara, too.
For all of that day, Mother pondered it. Then she decided she had to hear
the words from me. It was late afternoon in Idaho, nearly midnight in
England, when my mother, unsure how to place an international call, found
me online. The words on the screen were small, confined to a tiny text box
in the corner of the browser, but somehow they seemed to swallow the
room. She told me she had read my letter. I braced myself for her rage.
It is painful to face reality, she wrote. To realize there was something
ugly, and I refused to see it.
*2
I had to read those lines a number of times before I understood them.
Before I realized that she was not angry, not blaming me, or trying to
convince me I had only imagined. She believed me.
Don’t blame yourself, I told her. Your mind was never the same after the
accident.
Maybe, she said. But sometimes I think we choose our illnesses, because
they benefit us in some way.
I asked Mother why she’d never stopped Shawn from hurting me.
Shawn always said you picked the fights, and I guess I wanted to believe
that, because it was easier. Because you were strong and rational, and
anyone could see that Shawn was not.
That didn’t make sense. If I had seemed rational, why had Mother
believed Shawn when he’d told her I was picking fights? That I needed to be
subdued, disciplined.
I’m a mother, she said. Mothers protect. And Shawn was so damaged.
I wanted to say that she was also my mother but I didn’t. I don’t think Dad
will believe any of this, I typed.
He will, she wrote. But it’s hard for him. It reminds him of the damage his
bipolar has caused to our family.
I had never heard Mother admit that Dad might be mentally ill. Years
before, I had told her what I’d learned in my psychology class about bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia, but she had shrugged it off. Hearing her say it
now felt liberating. The illness gave me something to attack besides my
father, so when Mother asked why I hadn’t come to her sooner, why I hadn’t
asked for help, I answered honestly.
Because you were so bullied by Dad, I said. You were not powerful in the
house. Dad ran things, and he was not going to help us.
I am stronger now, she said. I no longer run scared.
When I read this, I imagined my mother as a young woman, brilliant and
energetic, but also anxious and complying. Then the image changed, her
body thinning, elongating, her hair flowing, long and silver.
Emily is being bullied, I wrote.
She is, Mother said. Like I was.
She is you, I said.
She is me. But we know better now. We can rewrite the story.
I asked about a memory. It was from the weeks before I’d left for BYU,
after Shawn had had a particularly bad night. He’d brought Mother to tears,
then plopped onto the sofa and turned on the TV. I’d found her sobbing at
the kitchen table, and she’d asked me not to go to BYU. “You’re the only
one strong enough to handle him,” she’d said. “I can’t, and your father can’t.
It has to be you.”
I typed slowly, reluctantly: Do you remember telling me not to go to
school, that I was the only one who could handle Shawn?
Yes, I remember that.
There was a pause, then more words appeared—words I hadn’t known I
needed to hear, but once I saw them, I realized I’d been searching my whole
life for them.
You were my child. I should have protected you.
I lived a lifetime in the moment I read those lines, a life that was not the
one I had actually lived. I became a different person, who remembered a
different childhood. I didn’t understand the magic of those words then, and I
don’t understand it now. I know only this: that when my mother told me she
had not been the mother to me that she wished she’d been, she became that
mother for the first time.
I love you, I wrote, and closed my laptop.
—
MOTHER AND I SPOKE only once about that conversation, on the phone, a
week later. “It’s being dealt with,” she said. “I told your father what you and
your sister said. Shawn will get help.”
I put the issue from my mind. My mother had taken up the cause. She
was strong. She had built that business, with all those people working for
her, and it dwarfed my father’s business, and all the other businesses in the
whole town; she, that docile woman, had a power in her the rest of us
couldn’t contemplate. And Dad. He had changed. He was softer, more prone
to laugh. The future could be different from the past. Even the past could be
different from the past, because my memories could change: I no longer
remembered Mother listening in the kitchen while Shawn pinned me to the
floor, pressing my windpipe. I no longer remembered her looking away.
My life in Cambridge was transformed—or rather, I was transformed into
someone who believed she belonged in Cambridge. The shame I’d long felt
about my family leaked out of me almost overnight. For the first time in my
life I talked openly about where I’d come from. I admitted to my friends that
I’d never been to school. I described Buck’s Peak, with its many junkyards,
barns, corrals. I even told them about the root cellar full of supplies in the
wheat field, and the gasoline buried near the old barn.
I told them I’d been poor, I told them I’d been ignorant, and in telling
them this I felt not the slightest prick of shame. Only then did I understand
where the shame had come from: it wasn’t that I hadn’t studied in a marble
conservatory, or that my father wasn’t a diplomat. It wasn’t that Dad was
half out of his mind, or that Mother followed him. It had come from having
a father who shoved me toward the chomping blades of the Shear, instead of
pulling me away from them. It had come from those moments on the floor,
from knowing that Mother was in the next room, closing her eyes and ears
to me, and choosing, for that moment, not to be my mother at all.
I fashioned a new history for myself. I became a popular dinner guest,
with my stories of hunting and horses, of scrapping and fighting mountain
fires. Of my brilliant mother, midwife and entrepreneur; of my eccentric
father, junkman and zealot. I thought I was finally being honest about the
life I’d had before. It wasn’t the truth exactly, but it was true in a larger
sense: true to what would be, in the future, now that everything had changed
for the better. Now that Mother had found her strength.
The past was a ghost, insubstantial, unaffecting. Only the future had
weight.
*1 The italics used on this page indicate that the language from the referenced email is paraphrased,
not directly quoted. The meaning has been preserved.
*2 The italicized language in the description of the referenced text exchange is paraphrased, not
directly quoted. The meaning has been preserved.
When I next returned to Buck’s Peak, it was autumn and Grandma-down the-hill was dying. For nine years she had battled the cancer in her bone
marrow; now the contest was ending. I had just learned that I’d won a place
at Cambridge to study for a PhD when Mother wrote to me. “Grandma is in
the hospital again,” she said. “Come quick. I think this will be the last time.”
When I landed in Salt Lake, Grandma was drifting in and out of
consciousness. Drew met me at the airport. We were more than friends by
then, and Drew said he would drive me to Idaho, to the hospital in town.
I hadn’t been back there since I’d taken Shawn years before, and as I
walked down its white, antiseptic hallway, it was difficult not to think of
him. We found Grandma’s room. Grandpa was seated at her bedside,
holding her speckled hand. Her eyes were open and she looked at me. “It’s
my little Tara, come all the way from England,” she said, then her eyes
closed. Grandpa squeezed her hand but she was asleep. A nurse told us she
would likely sleep for hours.
Drew said he would drive me to Buck’s Peak. I agreed, and it wasn’t until
the mountain came into view that I wondered whether I’d made a mistake.
Drew had heard my stories, but still there was a risk in bringing him here:
this was not a story, and I doubted whether anyone would play the part I had
written for them.
The house was in chaos. There were women everywhere, some taking
orders over the phone, others mixing oils or straining tinctures. There was a
new annex on the south side of the house, where younger women were
filling bottles and packaging orders for shipment. I left Drew in the living
room and went to the bathroom, which was the only room in the house that
still looked the way I remembered it. When I came out I walked straight into
a thin old woman with wiry hair and large, square glasses.
“This bathroom is for senior management only,” she said. “Bottle fillers
must use the bathroom in the annex.”
“I don’t work here,” I said.
She stared at me. Of course I worked here. Everyone worked here.
“This bathroom is for senior management,” she repeated, straightening to
her full height. “You are not allowed to leave the annex.”
She walked away before I could reply.
I still hadn’t seen either of my parents. I weaved my way back through the
house and found Drew on the sofa, listening to a woman explain that aspirin
can cause infertility. I grasped his hand and pulled him behind me, cutting a
path through the strangers.
“Is this place for real?” he said.
I found Mother in a windowless room in the basement. I had the
impression that she was hiding there. I introduced her to Drew and she
smiled warmly. “Where’s Dad?” I said. I suspected that he was sick in bed,
as he had been prone to pulmonary illnesses since the explosion had charred
his lungs.
“I’m sure he’s in the fray,” she said, rolling her eyes at the ceiling, which
thrummed with the thudding of feet.
Mother came with us upstairs. The moment she appeared on the landing,
she was hailed by several of her employees with questions from clients.
Everyone seemed to want her opinion—about their burns, their heart
tremors, their underweight infants. She waved them off and pressed forward.
The impression she gave as she moved through her own house was of a
celebrity in a crowded restaurant, trying not to be recognized.
My father’s desk was the size of a car. It was parked in the center of the
chaos. He was on the phone, which he’d wedged between his cheek and
shoulder so it wouldn’t slip through his waxy hands. “Doctors can’t help
with them diabetes,” he said, much too loudly. “But the Lord can!”
I looked sideways at Drew, who was smiling. Dad hung up and turned
toward us. He greeted Drew with a large grin. He radiated energy, feeding
off the general bedlam of the house. Drew said he was impressed with the
business, and Dad seemed to grow six inches. “We’ve been blessed for
doing the Lord’s work,” he said.
The phone rang again. There were at least three employees tasked with
answering it, but Dad leapt for the receiver as if he’d been waiting for an
important call. I’d never seen him so full of life.
“The power of God on earth,” he shouted into the mouthpiece. “That’s
what these oils are: God’s pharmacy!”
The noise in the house was disorienting, so I took Drew up the mountain.
We strolled through fields of wild wheat and from there into the skirt of
pines at the mountain base. The fall colors were soothing and we stayed for
hours, gazing down at the quiet valley. It was late afternoon when we finally
made our way back to the house and Drew left for Salt Lake City.
I entered the Chapel through the French doors and was surprised by the
silence. The house was empty, every phone disconnected, every workstation
abandoned. Mother sat alone in the center of the room.
“The hospital called,” she said. “Grandma’s gone.”
—
MY FATHER LOST HIS appetite for the business. He started getting out of bed
later and later, and when he did, it seemed it was only to insult or accuse. He
shouted at Shawn about the junkyard and lectured Mother about her
management of the employees. He snapped at Audrey when she tried to
make him lunch, and barked at me for typing too loudly. It was as if he
wanted to fight, to punish himself for the old woman’s death. Or perhaps the
punishment was for her life, for the conflict that had been between them,
which had only ended now she was dead.
The house slowly filled again. The phones were reconnected, and women
materialized to answer them. Dad’s desk remained empty. He spent his days
in bed, gazing up at the stucco ceiling. I brought him supper, as I had as a
child, and wondered now, as I’d wondered then, whether he knew I was
there.
Mother moved about the house with the vitality of ten people, mixing
tinctures and essential oils, directing her employees between making funeral
arrangements and cooking for every cousin and aunt who dropped in
unannounced to reminisce about Grandma. As often as not I’d find her in an
apron, hovering over a roast with a phone in each hand, one a client, the
other an uncle or friend calling to offer condolences. Through all this my
father remained in bed.
Dad spoke at the funeral. His speech was a twenty-minute sermon on
God’s promises to Abraham. He mentioned my grandmother twice. To
strangers it must have seemed he was hardly affected by the loss of his
mother, but we knew better, we who could see the devastation.
When we arrived home from the service, Dad was incensed that lunch
wasn’t ready. Mother scrambled to serve the stew she’d left to slow-cook,
but after the meal Dad seemed equally frustrated by the dishes, which
Mother hurriedly cleaned, and then by his grandchildren, who played noisily
while Mother dashed about trying to hush them.
That evening, when the house was empty and quiet, I listened from the
living room as my parents argued in the kitchen.
“The least you could do,” Mother said, “is fill out these thank-you cards.
It was your mother, after all.”
“That’s wifely work,” Dad said. “I’ve never heard of a man writing
cards.”
He had said the exact wrong thing. For ten years, Mother had been the
primary breadwinner, while continuing to cook meals, clean the house, do
the laundry, and I had never once heard her express anything like
resentment. Until now.
“Then you should do the husband’s work,” she said, her voice raised.
Soon they were both shouting. Dad tried to corral her, to subdue her with
a show of anger, the way he always had, but this only made her more
stubborn. Eventually she tossed the cards on the table and said, “Fill them
out or don’t. But if you don’t, no one will.” Then she marched downstairs.
Dad followed, and for an hour their shouts rose up through the floor. I’d
never heard my parents shout like that—at least, not my mother. I’d never
seen her refuse to give way.
The next morning I found Dad in the kitchen, dumping flour into a glue like substance I assumed was supposed to be pancake batter. When he saw
me, he dropped the flour and sat at the table. “You’re a woman, ain’tcha?”
he said. “Well, this here’s a kitchen.” We stared at each other and I
contemplated the distance that had sprung up between us—how natural
those words sounded to his ears, how grating to mine.
It wasn’t like Mother to leave Dad to make his own breakfast. I thought
she might be ill and went downstairs to check on her. I’d barely made it to
the landing when I heard it: deep sobs coming from the bathroom, muffled
by the steady drone of a blow-dryer. I stood outside the door and listened for
more than a minute, paralyzed. Would she want me to leave, to pretend I
hadn’t heard? I waited for her to catch her breath, but her sobs only grew
more desperate.
I knocked. “It’s me,” I said.
The door opened, a sliver at first, then wider, and there was my mother,
her skin glistening from the shower, wrapped in a towel that was too small
to cover her. I had never seen my mother this way, and instinctively I closed
my eyes. The world went black. I heard a thud, the cracking of plastic, and
opened my eyes. Mother had dropped the blow-dryer and it had struck the
floor, its roar now doubled as it rebounded off the exposed concrete. I
looked at her, and as I did she pulled me to her and held me. The wet from
her body seeped into my clothes, and I felt droplets slide from her hair and
onto my shoulder.
I didn’t stay long on Buck’s Peak, maybe a week. On the day I left the
mountain, Audrey asked me not to go. I have no memory of the
conversation, but I remember writing the journal entry about it. I wrote it
my first night back in Cambridge, while sitting on a stone bridge and staring
up at King’s College Chapel. I remember the river, which was calm; I
remember the slow drift of autumn leaves resting on the glassy surface. I
remember the scratch of my pen moving across the page, recounting in
detail, for a full eight pages, precisely what my sister had said. But the
memory of her saying it is gone: it is as if I wrote in order to forget.
Audrey asked me to stay. Shawn was too strong, she said, too persuasive,
for her to confront him alone. I told her she wasn’t alone, she had Mother.
Audrey said I didn’t understand. No one had believed us after all. If we
asked Dad for help, she was sure he’d call us both liars. I told her our
parents had changed and we should trust them. Then I boarded a plane and
took myself five thousand miles away.
If I felt guilty to be documenting my sister’s fears from such a safe
distance, surrounded by grand libraries and ancient chapels, I gave only one
indication of it, in the last line I wrote that night: Cambridge is less
beautiful tonight.
—
DREW HAD COME WITH me to Cambridge, having been admitted to a master’s
program in Middle Eastern studies. I told him about my conversation with
Audrey. He was the first boyfriend in whom I confided about my family—
really confided, the truth and not just amusing anecdotes. Of course all that
is in the past, I said. My family is different now. But you should know. So
you can watch me. In case I do something crazy.
The first term passed in a flurry of dinners and late-night parties,
punctuated by even later nights in the library. To qualify for a PhD, I had to
produce a piece of original academic research. In other words, having spent
five years reading history, I was now being asked to write it.
But to write what? While reading for my master’s thesis, I’d been
surprised to discover echoes of Mormon theology in the great philosophers
of the nineteenth century. I mentioned this to David Runciman, my
supervisor. “That’s your project,” he said. “You can do something no one
has done: you can examine Mormonism not just as a religious movement,
but as an intellectual one.”
I began to reread the letters of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young. As a
child I’d read those letters as an act of worship; now I read them with
different eyes, not the eyes of a critic, but also not the eyes of a disciple. I
examined polygamy, not as a doctrine but as a social policy. I measured it
against its own aims, as well as against other movements and theories from
the same period. It felt like a radical act.
My friends in Cambridge had become a kind of family, and I felt a sense
of belonging with them that, for many years, had been absent on Buck’s
Peak. Sometimes I felt damned for those feelings. No natural sister should
love a stranger more than a brother, I thought, and what sort of daughter
prefers a teacher to her own father?
But although I wished it were otherwise, I did not want to go home. I
preferred the family I had chosen to the one I had been given, so the happier
I became in Cambridge, the more my happiness was made fetid by my
feeling that I had betrayed Buck’s Peak. That feeling became a physical part
of me, something I could taste on my tongue or smell on my own breath.
I bought a ticket to Idaho for Christmas. The night before my flight, there
was a feast in my college. One of my friends had formed a chamber choir
that was to sing carols during dinner. The choir had been rehearsing for
weeks, but on the day of the feast the soprano fell ill with bronchitis. My
phone rang late that afternoon. It was my friend. “Please tell me you know
someone who can sing,” he said.
I had not sung for years, and never without my father to hear me, but a
few hours later I joined the chamber choir on a platform near the rafters,
above the massive Christmas tree that dominated the hall. I treasured the
moment, taking pleasure in the lightness I felt to have music once again
floating up from my chest, and wondering whether Dad, if he were here,
would have braved the university and all its socialism to hear me sing. I
believed he would.
—
BUCK’S PEAK WAS UNCHANGED. The Princess was buried in snow but I could
see the deep contours of her legs. Mother was in the kitchen when I arrived,
stirring a stew with one hand and with the other holding the phone and
explaining the properties of motherwort. Dad’s desk was still empty. He was
in the basement, Mother said, in bed. Something had hold of his lungs.
A burly stranger shuffled through the back door. Several seconds passed
before I recognized my brother. Luke’s beard was so thick, he looked like
one of his goats. His left eye was white and dead: he’d been shot in the face
with a paintball gun a few months before. He crossed the room and clapped
me on the back, and I stared into his remaining eye, looking for something
familiar. But it wasn’t until I saw the raised scar on his forearm, a curved
check mark two inches wide from where the Shear had bitten his flesh, that I
was sure this man was my brother.
* He told me he was living with his wife
and a pack of kids in a mobile home behind the barn, making his money
working oil rigs in North Dakota.
Two days passed. Dad came upstairs every evening and settled himself
into a sofa in the Chapel, where he would cough and watch TV or read the
Old Testament. I spent my days studying or helping Mother.
On the third evening I was at the kitchen table, reading, when Shawn and
Benjamin shuffled through the back door. Benjamin was telling Shawn
about a punch he’d thrown after a fender bender in town. He said that before
climbing out of his truck to confront the other driver, he’d slipped his
handgun into the waistband of his jeans. “The guy didn’t know what he was
getting into,” Benjamin said, grinning.
“Only an idiot brings a gun into a mess like that,” Shawn said.
“I wasn’t gonna use it,” Benjamin muttered.
“Then don’t bring it,” Shawn said. “Then you know you won’t use it. If
you bring it you might use it, that’s how things are. A fistfight can turn into a
gunfight real quick.”
Shawn spoke calmly, thoughtfully. His blond hair was filthy and uncut,
growing wild, and his face was covered in stubble the color of shale. His
eyes shone from under the oil and dirt, blazes of blue in clouds of ash. His
expression, as well as his words, seemed to belong to a much older man, a
man whose hot blood had cooled, who was at peace.
Shawn turned to me. I had been avoiding him, but suddenly that seemed
unfair. He had changed; it was cruel to pretend he hadn’t. He asked if I’d
like to go for a drive, and I said I would. Shawn wanted ice cream so we got
milkshakes. The conversation was calm, comfortable, like it had been years
before on those dusky evenings in the corral. He told me about running the
crew without Dad, about Peter’s frail lungs—about the surgeries and the
oxygen tubes he still wore at night.
We were nearly home, only a mile from Buck’s Peak, when Shawn
cranked the wheel and the car skidded on the ice. He accelerated through
the spin, the tires caught, and the car leapt onto a side road.
“Where we going?” I asked, but the road only went one place.
The church was dark, the parking lot deserted.
Shawn circled the lot, then parked near the main entrance. He switched
off the ignition and the headlights faded. I could barely make out the curve
of his face in the dark.
“You talk much to Audrey?” he said.
“Not really,” I said.
He seemed to relax, then he said, “Audrey is a lying piece of shit.”
I looked away, fixing my eyes on the church spire, visible against the light
from the stars.
“I’d put a bullet in her head,” Shawn said, and I felt his body shift toward
me. “But I don’t want to waste a good bullet on a worthless bitch.”
It was crucial that I not look at him. As long as I kept my eyes on the
spire, I almost believed he couldn’t touch me. Almost. Because even while I
clung to this belief, I waited to feel his hands on my neck. I knew I would
feel them, and soon, but I didn’t dare do anything that might break the spell
of waiting. In that moment part of me believed, as I had always believed,
that it would be me who broke the spell, who caused it to break. When the
stillness shattered and his fury rushed at me, I would know that something I
had done was the catalyst, the cause. There is hope in such a superstition;
there is the illusion of control.
I stayed still, without thought or motion.
The ignition clicked, the engine growled to life. Warm air flooded through
the vents.
“You feel like a movie?” Shawn said. His voice was casual. I watched the
world revolve as the car spun around and lurched back to the highway. “A
movie sounds just right,” he said.
I said nothing, unwilling to move or speak lest I offend the strange sorcery
of physics that I still believed had saved me. Shawn seemed unaware of my
silence. He drove the last mile to Buck’s Peak chatting cheerfully, almost
playfully, about whether to watch The Man Who Knew Too Little, or not.
* I remember this as the scar Luke got from working the Shear; however, it might have come from a
roofing accident.
I didn’t feel particularly brave as I approached my father in the Chapel that
night. I saw my role as reconnaissance: I was there to relay information, to
tell Dad that Shawn had threatened Audrey, because Dad would know what
to do.
Or perhaps I was calm because I was not there, not really. Maybe I was
across an ocean, on another continent, reading Hume under a stone archway.
Maybe I was racing through King’s College, the Discourse on Inequality
tucked under my arm.
“Dad, I need to tell you something.”
I said that Shawn had made a joke about shooting Audrey, and that I
thought it was because Audrey had confronted him about his behavior. Dad
stared at me, and the skin where his lips had been tightened. He shouted for
Mother and she appeared. Her mood was somber; I couldn’t understand why
she wouldn’t look me in the eye.
“What exactly are you saying?” Dad said.
From that moment it was an interrogation. Every time I suggested that
Shawn was violent or manipulative in any way, Dad shouted at me:
“Where’s your proof? Do you have proof?”
“I have journals,” I said.
“Get them, I’m going to read them.”
“I don’t have them with me.” This was a lie; they were under my bed.
“What the hell am I supposed to think if you ain’t got proof?” Dad was
still shouting. Mother sat on the sofa’s edge, her mouth open in a slant. She
looked in agony.
“You don’t need proof,” I said quietly. “You’ve seen it. You’ve both seen
it.”
Dad said I wouldn’t be happy until Shawn was rotting in prison, that I’d
come back from Cambridge just to raise hell. I said I didn’t want Shawn in
prison but that some type of intervention was needed. I turned to Mother,
waiting for her to add her voice to mine, but she was silent. Her eyes were
fixed on the floor as if Dad and I were not there.
There was a moment when I realized she would not speak, that she would
sit there and say nothing, that I was alone. I tried to calm Dad but my voice
trembled, cracked. Then I was wailing—sobs erupted from somewhere,
some part of me I had not felt in years, that I had forgotten existed. I thought
I might vomit.
I ran to the bathroom. I was shaking from my feet to my fingers.
I had to strangle the sobs quickly—Dad would never take me seriously if
I couldn’t—so I stopped the bawling using the old methods: staring my face
down in the mirror and scolding it for every tear. It was such a familiar
process, that in doing it I shattered the illusion I’d been building so carefully
for the past year. The fake past, the fake future, both gone.
I stared at the reflection. The mirror was mesmeric, with its triple panels
trimmed with false oak. It was the same mirror I’d gazed into as a child,
then as a girl, then as a youth, half woman, half girl. Behind me was the
same toilet Shawn had put my head in, holding me there until I confessed I
was a whore.
I had often locked myself in this bathroom after Shawn let me go. I would
move the panels until they showed my face three times, then I would glare at
each one, contemplating what Shawn had said and what he had made me
say, until it all began to feel true instead of just something I had said to make
the pain stop. And here I was still, and here was the mirror. The same face,
repeated in the same three panels.
Except it wasn’t. This face was older, and floating above a soft cashmere
sweater. But Dr. Kerry was right: it wasn’t the clothes that made this face,
this woman, different. It was something behind her eyes, something in the
set of her jaw—a hope or belief or conviction—that a life is not a thing
unalterable. I don’t have a word for what it was I saw, but I suppose it was
something like faith.
I had regained a fragile sense of calm, and I left the bathroom carrying
that calmness delicately, as if it were a china plate balancing on my head. I
walked slowly down the hall, taking small, even steps.
“I’m going to bed,” I said when I’d made it to the Chapel. “We’ll talk
about this tomorrow.”
Dad was at his desk, holding a phone in his left hand. “We’ll talk about it
now,” he said. “I told Shawn what you said. He is coming.”
—
I CONSIDERED MAKING A run for it. Could I get to my car before Shawn made
it to the house? Where were the keys? I need my laptop, I thought, with my
research. Leave it, the girl from the mirror said.
Dad told me to sit and I did. I don’t know how long I waited, paralyzed
with indecision, but I was still wondering if there was time to escape when
the French doors opened and Shawn walked in. Suddenly the vast room felt
tiny. I looked at my hands. I couldn’t raise my eyes.
I heard footsteps. Shawn had crossed the room and was now sitting next
to me on the sofa. He waited for me to look at him, and when I didn’t he
reached out and took my hand. Gently, as if he were unfolding the petals of
a rose, he peeled open my fingers and dropped something into them. I felt
the cold of the blade before I saw it, and sensed the blood even before I
glimpsed the red streak staining my palm.
The knife was small, only five or six inches long and very thin. The blade
glowed crimson. I rubbed my thumb and index finger together, then brought
them to my nose and inhaled. Metallic. It was definitely blood. Not mine—
he’d merely handed me the knife—but whose?
“If you’re smart, Siddle Lister,” Shawn said, “you’ll use this on yourself.
Because it will be better than what I’ll do to you if you don’t.”
“That’s uncalled for,” Mother said.
I gaped at Mother, then at Shawn. I must have seemed like an idiot to
them, but I couldn’t grasp what was happening well enough to respond to it.
I half-wondered if I should return to the bathroom and climb through the
mirror, then send out the other girl, the one who was sixteen. She could
handle this, I thought. She would not be afraid, like I was. She would not be
hurt, like I was. She was a thing of stone, with no fleshy tenderness. I did
not yet understand that it was this fact of being tender—of having lived
some years of a life that allowed tenderness—that would, finally, save me.
I stared at the blade. Dad began a lecture, pausing often so Mother could
ratify his remarks. I heard voices, among them my own, chanting harmonies
in an ancient hall. I heard laughter, the slosh of wine being poured from a
bottle, the tinkle of butter knives tapping porcelain. I heard little of my
father’s speech, but I remember exactly, as if it were happening now, being
transported over an ocean and back through three sunsets, to the night I had
sung with my friends in the chamber choir. I must have fallen asleep, I
thought. Too much wine. Too much Christmas turkey.
Having decided I was dreaming, I did what one does in dreams: I tried to
understand and use the rules of this queer reality. I reasoned with the
strange shadows impersonating my family, and when reasoning failed, I lied.
The impostors had bent reality. Now it was my turn. I told Shawn I hadn’t
said anything to Dad. I said things like “I don’t know how Dad got that idea”
and “Dad must have misheard me,” hoping that if I rejected their
percipience, they would simply dissipate. An hour later, when the four of us
were still seated on the sofas, I finally came to terms with their physical
persistence. They were here, and so was I.
The blood on my hands had dried. The knife lay on the carpet, forgotten
by everyone except me. I tried not to stare at it. Whose was the blood? I
studied my brother. He had not cut himself.
Dad had begun a new lecture, and this time I was present enough to hear
it. He explained that little girls need to be instructed in how to behave
appropriately around men, so as not to be too inviting. He’d noticed indecent
habits in my sister’s daughters, the oldest of whom was six. Shawn was
calm. He had been worn down by the sheer duration of Dad’s droning. More
than that, he felt protected, justified, so that when the lecture finally ended
he said to me, “I don’t know what you said to Dad tonight, but I can tell just
by looking at you that I’ve hurt you. And I’m sorry.”
We hugged. We laughed like we always did after a fight. I smiled at him
like I’d always done, like she would have. But she wasn’t there, and the
smile was a fake.
—
I WENT TO MY ROOM and shut the door, quietly sliding the bolt, and called
Drew. I was nearly incoherent with panic but eventually he understood. He
said I should leave, right now, and he’d meet me halfway. I can’t, I said. At
this moment things are calm. If I try to run off in the middle of the night, I
don’t know what will happen.
I went to bed but not to sleep. I waited until six in the morning, then I
found Mother in the kitchen. I’d borrowed the car I was driving from Drew,
so I told Mother something had come up unexpectedly, that Drew needed
his car in Salt Lake. I said I’d be back in a day or two.
A few minutes later I was driving down the hill. The highway was in sight
when I saw something and stopped. It was the trailer where Shawn lived
with Emily and Peter. A few feet from the trailer, near the door, the snow
was stained with blood. Something had died there.
From Mother I would later learn it was Diego, a German shepherd Shawn
had purchased a few years before. The dog had been a pet, much beloved by
Peter. After Dad had called, Shawn had stepped outside and slashed the dog
to death, while his young son, only feet away, listened to the dog scream.
Mother said the execution had nothing to do with me, that it had to be done
because Diego was killing Luke’s chickens. It was a coincidence, she said.
I wanted to believe her but didn’t. Diego had been killing Luke’s chickens
for more than a year. Besides, Diego was a purebred. Shawn had paid five
hundred dollars for him. He could have been sold.
But the real reason I didn’t believe her was the knife. I’d seen my father
and brothers put down dozens of dogs over the years—strays mostly, that
wouldn’t stay out of the chicken coop. I’d never seen anyone use a knife on a
dog. We shot them, in the head or the heart, so it was quick. But Shawn
chose a knife, and a knife whose blade was barely bigger than his thumb. It
was the knife you’d choose to experience a slaughter, to feel the blood
running down your hand the moment the heart stopped beating. It wasn’t the
knife of a farmer, or even of a butcher. It was a knife of rage.
—
I DON’T KNOW WHAT happened in the days that followed. Even now, as I
scrutinize the components of the confrontation—the threat, the denial, the
lecture, the apology—it is difficult to relate them. When I considered it
weeks later, it seemed I had made a thousand mistakes, driven a thousand
knives into the heart of my own family. Only later did it occur to me that
whatever damage was done that night might not have been done solely by
me. And it was more than a year before I understood what should have been
immediately apparent: that my mother had not confronted my father, and my
father had not confronted Shawn. Dad had never promised to help me and
Audrey. Mother had lied.
Now, when I reflect on my mother’s words, remembering the way they
appeared as if by magic on the screen, one detail stands above the rest: that
Mother described my father as bipolar. It was the exact disorder that I
myself suspected. It was my word, not hers. Then I wonder if perhaps my
mother, who had always reflected so perfectly the will of my father, had that
night merely been reflecting mine.
No, I tell myself. They were her words. But hers or not, those words,
which had so comforted and healed me, were hollow. I don’t believe they
were faithless, but sincerity failed to give them substance, and they were
swept away by other, stronger currents.
I fled the mountain with my bags half packed and did not retrieve anything
that was left behind. I went to Salt Lake and spent the rest of the holidays
with Drew.
I tried to forget that night. For the first time in fifteen years, I closed my
journal and put it away. Journaling is contemplative, and I didn’t want to
contemplate anything.
After the New Year I returned to Cambridge, but I withdrew from my
friends. I had seen the earth tremble, felt the preliminary shock; now I
waited for the seismic event that would transform the landsape. I knew how
it would begin. Shawn would think about what Dad had told him on the
phone, and sooner or later he would realize that my denial—my claim that
Dad had misunderstood me—was a lie. When he realized the truth, he
would despise himself for perhaps an hour. Then he would transfer his
loathing to me.
It was early March when it happened. Shawn sent me an email. It
contained no greeting, no message whatsoever. Just a chapter from the
Bible, from Matthew, with a single verse set apart in bold: O generation of
vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? It froze my blood.
Shawn called an hour later. His tone was casual, and we talked for twenty
minutes about Peter, about how his lungs were developing. Then he said, “I
have a decision to make, and I’d like your advice.”
“Sure.”
“I can’t decide,” he said. He paused, and I thought perhaps the connection
had failed. “Whether I should kill you myself, or hire an assassin.” There
was a static-filled silence. “It might be cheaper to hire someone, when you
figure in the cost of the flight.”
I pretended I hadn’t understood, but this only made him aggressive. Now
he was hurling insults, snarling. I tried to calm him but it was pointless. We
were seeing each other at long last. I hung up on him but he called again,
and again and again, each time repeating the same lines, that I should watch
my back, that his assassin was coming for me. I called my parents.
“He didn’t mean it,” Mother said. “Anyway, he doesn’t have that kind of
money.”
“Not the point,” I said.
Dad wanted evidence. “You didn’t record the call?” he said. “How am I
supposed to know if he was serious?”
“He sounded like he did when he threatened me with the bloody knife,” I
said.
“Well, he wasn’t serious about that.”
“Not the point,” I said again.
The phone calls stopped, eventually, but not because of anything my
parents did. They stopped when Shawn cut me out of his life. He wrote,
telling me to stay away from his wife and child, and to stay the hell away
from him. The email was long, a thousand words of accusation and bile, but
by the end his tone was mournful. He said he loved his brothers, that they
were the best men he knew. I loved you the best of all of them, he wrote, but
you had a knife in my back the whole time.
It had been years since I’d had a relationship with my brother, but the loss
of it, even with months of foreknowledge, stunned me.
My parents said he was justified in cutting me off. Dad said I was
hysterical, that I’d thrown thoughtless accusations when it was obvious my
memory couldn’t be trusted. Mother said my rage was a real threat and that
Shawn had a right to protect his family. “Your anger that night,” she told me
on the phone, meaning the night Shawn had killed Diego, “was twice as
dangerous as Shawn has ever been.”
Reality became fluid. The ground gave way beneath my feet, dragging me
downward, spinning fast, like sand rushing through a hole in the bottom of
the universe. The next time we spoke, Mother told me that the knife had
never been meant as a threat. “Shawn was trying to make you more
comfortable,” she said. “He knew you’d be scared if he were holding a
knife, so he gave it to you.” A week later she said there had never been any
knife at all.
“Talking to you,” she said, “your reality is so warped. It’s like talking to
someone who wasn’t even there.”
I agreed. It was exactly like that.
—
I HAD A GRANT to study that summer in Paris. Drew came with me. Our flat
was in the sixth arrondissement, near the Luxembourg Gardens. My life
there was entirely new, and as near to a cliché as I could make it. I was
drawn to those parts of the city where one could find the most tourists so I
could throw myself into their center. It was a hectic form of forgetting, and I
spent the summer in pursuit of it: of losing myself in swarms of travelers,
allowing myself to be wiped clean of all personality and character, of all
history. The more crass the attraction, the more I was drawn to it.
I had been in Paris for several weeks when, one afternoon, returning from
a French lesson, I stopped at a café to check my email. There was a message
from my sister.
My father had visited her—this I understood immediately—but I had to
read the message several times before I understood what exactly had taken
place. Our father had testified to her that Shawn had been cleansed by the
Atonement of Christ, that he was a new man. Dad had warned Audrey that
if she ever again brought up the past, it would destroy our entire family. It
was God’s will that Audrey and I forgive Shawn, Dad said. If we did not,
ours would be the greater sin.
I could easily imagine this meeting, the gravity of my father as he sat
across from my sister, the reverence and power in his words.
Audrey told Dad that she had accepted the power of the Atonement long
ago, and had forgiven her brother. She said that I had provoked her, had
stirred up anger in her. That I had betrayed her because I’d given myself over
to fear, the realm of Satan, rather than walking in faith with God. I was
dangerous, she said, because I was controlled by that fear, and by the Father
of Fear, Lucifer.
That is how my sister ended her letter, by telling me I was not welcome in
her home, or even to call her unless someone else was on the line to
supervise, to keep her from succumbing to my influence. When I read this, I
laughed out loud. The situation was perverse but not without irony: a few
months before, Audrey had said that Shawn should be supervised around
children. Now, after our efforts, the one who would be supervised was me.
—
WHEN I LOST MY SISTER, I lost my family.
I knew my father would pay my brothers the same visit he’d paid her.
Would they believe him? I thought they would. After all, Audrey would
confirm it. My denials would be meaningless, the rantings of a stranger. I’d
wandered too far, changed too much, bore too little resemblance to the
scabby-kneed girl they remembered as their sister.
There was little hope of overpowering the history my father and sister
were creating for me. Their account would claim my brothers first, then it
would spread to my aunts, uncles, cousins, the whole valley. I had lost an
entire kinship, and for what?
It was in this state of mind that I received another letter: I had won a
visiting fellowship to Harvard. I don’t think I have ever received a piece of
news with more indifference. I knew I should be drunk with gratitude that I,
an ignorant girl who’d crawled out of a scrap heap, should be allowed to
study there, but I couldn’t summon the fervor. I had begun to conceive of
what my education might cost me, and I had begun to resent it.
—
AFTER I READ AUDREY’S LETTER, the past shifted. It started with my
memories of her. They transformed. When I recalled any part of our
childhood together, moments of tenderness or humor, of the little girl who
had been me with the little girl who had been her, the memory was
immediately changed, blemished, turned to rot. The past became as ghastly
as the present.
The change was repeated with every member of my family. My memories
of them became ominous, indicting. The female child in them, who had
been me, stopped being a child and became something else, something
threatening and ruthless, something that would consume them.
This monster child stalked me for a month before I found a logic to
banish her: that I was likely insane. If I was insane, everything could be
made to make sense. If I was sane, nothing could. This logic seemed
damning. It was also a relief. I was not evil; I was clinical.
I began to defer, always, to the judgment of others. If Drew remembered
something differently than I did, I would immediately concede the point. I
began to rely on Drew to tell me the facts of our lives. I took pleasure in
doubting myself about whether we’d seen a particular friend last week or the
week before, or whether our favorite crêperie was next to the library or the
museum. Questioning these trivial facts, and my ability to grasp them,
allowed me to doubt whether anything I remembered had happened at all.
My journals were a problem. I knew that my memories were not
memories only, that I had recorded them, that they existed in black and
white. This meant that more than my memory was in error. The delusion
was deeper, in the core of my mind, which invented in the very moment of
occurrence, then recorded the fiction.
In the month that followed, I lived the life of a lunatic. Seeing sunshine, I
suspected rain. I felt a relentless desire to ask people to verify whether they
were seeing what I was seeing. Is this book blue? I wanted to ask. Is that
man tall?
Sometimes this skepticism took the form of uncompromising certainty:
there were days when the more I doubted my own sanity, the more violently
I defended my own memories, my own “truth,” as the only truth possible.
Shawn was violent, dangerous, and my father was his protector. I couldn’t
bear to hear any other opinion on the subject.
In those moments I searched feverishly for a reason to think myself sane.
Evidence. I craved it like air. I wrote to Erin—the woman Shawn had dated
before and after Sadie, who I hadn’t seen since I was sixteen. I told her what
I remembered and asked her, bluntly, if I was deranged. She replied
immediately that I was not. To help me trust myself, she shared her
memories—of Shawn screaming at her that she was a whore. My mind
snagged on that word. I had not told her that that was my word.
Erin told me another story. Once, when she had talked back to Shawn—
just a little, she said, as if her manners were on trial—he’d ripped her from
her house and slammed her head against a brick wall so hard she’d thought
he was going to kill her. His hands locked around her throat. I was lucky,
she wrote. I had screamed before he began choking me, and my grandpa
heard it and stopped him in time. But I know what I saw in his eyes.
Her letter was like a handrail fixed to reality, one I could reach out and
grasp when my mind began to spin. That is, until it occurred to me that she
might be as crazy as I was. She was damaged, obviously, I told myself. How
could I trust her account after what she’d been through? I could not give this
woman credence because I, of all people, knew how crippling her
psychological injuries were. So I continued searching for testimony from
some other source.
Four years later, by pure chance, I would get it.
While traveling in Utah for research, I would meet a young man who
would bristle at my last name.
“Westover,” he would say, his face darkening. “Any relation to Shawn?”
“My brother.”
“Well, the last time I saw your brother,” he would say, emphasizing this
last word as if he were spitting on it, “he had both hands wrapped around
my cousin’s neck, and he was smashing her head into a brick wall. He would
have killed her, if it weren’t for my grandfather.”
And there it was. A witness. An impartial account. But by the time I
heard it, I no longer needed to hear it. The fever of self-doubt had broken
long ago. That’s not to say I trusted my memory absolutely, but I trusted it
as much as I trusted anybody else’s, and more than some people’s.
But that was years away.
It was a sunny September afternoon when I heaved my suitcase through
Harvard Yard. The colonial architecture felt foreign but also crisp and
unimposing compared to the Gothic pinnacles of Cambridge. The central
library, called the Widener, was the largest I had ever seen, and for a few
minutes I forgot the past year and stared up at it, wonderstruck.
My room was in the graduate dorms near the law school. It was small and
cavelike—dark, moist, frigid, with ashen walls and cold tiles the color of
lead. I spent as little time in it as possible. The university seemed to offer a
new beginning, and I intended to take it. I enrolled in every course I could
squeeze into my schedule, from German idealism to the history of
secularism to ethics and law. I joined a weekly study group to practice
French, and another to learn knitting. The graduate school offered a free
course on charcoal sketching. I had never drawn in my life but I signed up
for that, too.
I began to read—Hume, Rousseau, Smith, Godwin, Wollstonecraft and
Mill. I lost myself in the world they had lived in, the problems they had tried
to solve. I became obsessed with their ideas about the family—with how a
person ought to weigh their special obligations to kin against their
obligations to society as a whole. Then I began to write, weaving the strands
I’d found in Hume’s Principles of Morals with filaments from Mill’s The
Subjection of Women. It was good work, I knew it even as I wrote it, and
when I’d finished I set it aside. It was the first chapter of my PhD.
I returned from my sketching class one Saturday morning to find an email
from my mother. We’re coming to Harvard, she said. I read that line at least
three times, certain she was joking. My father did not travel—I’d never
known him to go anywhere except Arizona to visit his mother—so the idea
that he would fly across the country to see a daughter he believed taken by
the devil seemed ludicrous. Then I understood: he was coming to save me.
Mother said they had already booked their flights and would be staying in
my dorm room.
“Do you want a hotel?” I asked. They didn’t.
—
A FEW DAYS LATER, I signed in to an old chat program I hadn’t used in years.
There was a cheerful jingle and a name turned from gray to green. Charles
is online, it said. I’m not sure who started the chat, or who suggested
moving the conversation to the phone. We talked for an hour, and it was as if
no time had passed.
He asked where I was studying; when I answered, he said, “Harvard!
Holy hell!”
“Who woulda thought?” I said.
“I did,” he said, and it was true. He had always seen me like that, long
before there was any reason to.
I asked what he’d done after graduating from college and there was a
strained silence. “Things didn’t go the way I planned,” he said. He’d never
graduated. He’d dropped out his sophomore year after his son was born,
because his wife was sick and there was a mound of medical bills. He’d
signed on to work the oil rigs in Wyoming. “It was only supposed to be for a
few months,” he said. “That was a year ago.”
I told him about Shawn, how I’d lost him, how I was losing the rest of my
family. He listened quietly, then let out a long sigh and said, “Have you ever
thought maybe you should just let them go?”
I hadn’t, not once. “It’s not permanent,” I said. “I can fix it.”
“Funny how you can change so much,” Charles said, “but still sound the
same as when we were seventeen.”
—
MY PARENTS ARRIVED AS the leaves began to turn, when campus was at its
most beautiful, the reds and yellows of autumn mingling with the burgundy
of colonial brick. With his hayseed grammar, denim shirt and lifetime member NRA cap, Dad would have always been out of place at Harvard, but
his scarring intensified the effect. I had seen him many times in the years
since the explosion, but it wasn’t until he came to Harvard, and I saw him
set against my life there, that I realized how severely he’d disfigured himself.
That awareness reached me through the eyes of others—strangers whose
faces changed when he passed them in the street, who turned to get a second
look. Then I would look at him, too, and notice how the skin on his chin
was taut and plastic; how his lips lacked natural roundness; how his cheeks
sucked inward at an angle that was almost skeletal. His right hand, which he
often raised to point at some feature or other, was knotted and twisted, and
when I gazed at it, set against Harvard’s antediluvian steeples and columns,
it seemed to me the claw of some mythical creature.
Dad had little interest in the university, so I took him into the city. I
taught him how to take the T—how to feed his card through the slot and
push through the rotating gate. He laughed out loud, as if it were a fabulous
technology. A homeless man passed through our subway car and asked for a
dollar. Dad gave him a crisp fifty.
“You keep that up in Boston, you won’t have any money left,” I said.
“Doubt it,” Dad said with a wink. “The business is rolling. We got more
than we can spend!”
Because his health was fragile, my father took the bed. I had purchased
an air mattress, which I gave to Mother. I slept on the tile floor. Both my
parents snored loudly, and I lay awake all night. When the sun finally rose I
stayed on the floor, eyes closed, breathing slow, deep breaths, while my
parents ransacked my mini fridge and discussed me in hushed tones.
“The Lord has commanded me to testify,” Dad said. “She may yet be
brought to the Lord.”
While they plotted how to reconvert me, I plotted how to let them. I was
ready to yield, even if it meant an exorcism. A miracle would be useful: if I
could stage a convincing rebirth, I could dissociate from everything I’d said
and done in the last year. I could take it all back—blame Lucifer and be
given a clean slate. I imagined how esteemed I would be, as a newly
cleansed vessel. How loved. All I had to do was swap my memories for
theirs, and I could have my family.
My father wanted to visit the Sacred Grove in Palmyra, New York—the
forest where, according to Joseph Smith, God had appeared and commanded
him to found the true church. We rented a car and six hours later entered
Palmyra. Near the grove, off the highway, there was a shimmering temple
topped by a golden statue of the angel Moroni. Dad pulled over and asked
me to cross the temple grounds. “Touch the temple,” he said. “Its power will
cleanse you.”
I studied his face. His expression was stretched—earnest, desperate. With
all that was in him, he was willing me to touch the temple and be saved.
My father and I looked at the temple. He saw God; I saw granite. We
looked at each other. He saw a woman damned; I saw an unhinged old man,
literally disfigured by his beliefs. And yet, triumphant. I remembered the
words of Sancho Panza: An adventuring knight is someone who’s beaten
and then finds himself emperor.
When I reflect on that moment now, the image blurs, reconstituting itself
into that of a zealous knight astride a steed, charging into an imaginary
battle, striking at shadows, hacking into thin air. His jaw is set, his back
straight. His eyes blaze with conviction, throwing sparks that burn where
they lay. My mother gives me a pale, disbelieving look, but when he turns
his gaze on her they become of one mind, then they are both tilting at
windmills.
I crossed the grounds and held my palm to the temple stone. I closed my
eyes and tried to believe that this simple act could bring the miracle my
parents prayed for. That all I had to do was touch this relic and, by the power
of the Almighty, all would be put right. But I felt nothing. Just cold rock.
I returned to the car. “Let’s go,” I said.
When life itself seems lunatic, who knows where madness lies?
In the days that followed, I wrote that passage everywhere—
unconsciously, compulsively. I find it now in books I was reading, in my
lecture notes, in the margins of my journal. Its recitation was a mantra. I
willed myself to believe it—to believe there was no real difference between
what I knew to be true and what I knew to be false. To convince myself that
there was some dignity in what I planned to do, in surrendering my own
perceptions of right and wrong, of reality, of sanity itself, to earn the love of
my parents. For them I believed I could don armor and charge at giants,
even if I saw only windmills.
We entered the Sacred Grove. I walked ahead and found a bench beneath
a canopy of trees. It was a lovely wood, heavy with history. It was the reason
my ancestors had come to America. A twig snapped, my parents appeared.
They sat, one on either side of me.
My father spoke for two hours. He testified that he had beheld angels and
demons. He had seen physical manifestations of evil, and had been visited
by the Lord Jesus Christ, like the prophets of old, like Joseph Smith had
been in this very grove. His faith was no longer a faith, he said, but a perfect
knowledge.
“You have been taken by Lucifer,” he whispered, his hand on my
shoulder. “I could feel it the moment I entered your room.”
I thought of my dorm room—of the murky walls and frigid tiles, but also
of the sunflowers Drew had sent, and of the textile wall hanging a friend
from Zimbabwe had brought from his village.
Mother said nothing. She stared at the dirt, her eyes glossy, her lips
pursed. Dad prodded me for a response. I searched myself, reaching deep,
groping for the words he needed to hear. But they were not in me, not yet.
Before we returned to Harvard, I convinced my parents to take a detour to
Niagara Falls. The mood in the car was heavy, and at first I regretted having
suggested the diversion, but the moment Dad saw the falls he was
transformed, elated. I had a camera. Dad had always hated cameras but
when he saw mine his eyes shone with excitement. “Tara! Tara!” he
shouted, running ahead of me and Mother. “Get yourself a picture of this
angle. Ain’t that pretty!” It was as if he realized we were making a memory,
something beautiful we might need later. Or perhaps I’m projecting, because
that was how I felt. There are some photos from today that might help me
forget the grove, I wrote in my journal. There’s a picture of me and Dad
happy, together. Proof that’s possible.
—
WHEN WE RETURNED TO HARVARD, I offered to pay for a hotel. They refused
to go. For a week we stumbled over one another in my dorm room. Every
morning my father trudged up a flight of stairs to the communal shower in
nothing but a small white towel. This would have humiliated me at BYU,
but at Harvard I shrugged. I had transcended embarrassment. What did it
matter who saw him, or what he said to them, or how shocked they were? It
was his opinion I cared about; he was the one I was losing.
Then it was their last night, and still I had not been reborn.
Mother and I shuffled around the shared kitchen making a beef and potato
casserole, which we brought into the room on trays. My father studied his
plate quietly, as if he were alone. Mother made a few observations about the
food, then she laughed nervously and was silent.
When we’d finished, Dad said he had a gift for me. “It’s why I came,” he
said. “To offer you a priesthood blessing.”
In Mormonism, the priesthood is God’s power to act on earth—to advise,
to counsel, to heal the sick, and to cast out demons. It is given to men. This
was the moment: if I accepted the blessing, he would cleanse me. He would
lay his hands on my head and cast out the evil thing that had made me say
what I had said, that had made me unwelcome in my own family. All I had
to do was yield, and in five minutes it would be over.
I heard myself say no.
Dad gaped at me in disbelief, then he began to testify—not about God,
but about Mother. The herbs, he said, were a divine calling from the Lord.
Everything that happened to our family, every injury, every near death, was
because we had been chosen, we were special. God had orchestrated all of it
so we could denounce the Medical Establishment and testify of His power.
“Remember when Luke burned his leg?” Dad said, as if I could forget.
“That was the Lord’s plan. It was a curriculum. For your mother. So she
would be ready for what would happen to me.”
The explosion, the burn. It was the highest of spiritual honors, he said, to
be made a living testament of God’s power. Dad held my hands in his
mangled fingers and told me that his disfiguration had been foreordained.
That it was a tender mercy, that it had brought souls to God.
Mother added her testimony in low, reverent whispers. She said she could
stop a stroke by adjusting a chakra; that she could halt heart attacks using
only energy; that she could cure cancer if people had faith. She herself had
had breast cancer, she said, and she had cured it.
My head snapped up. “You have cancer?” I said. “You’re sure? You had it
tested?”
“I didn’t need to have it tested,” she said. “I muscle-tested it. It was
cancer. I cured it.”
“We could have cured Grandma, too,” Dad said. “But she turned away
from Christ. She lacked faith and that’s why she’s dead. God won’t heal the
faithless.”
Mother nodded but never looked up.
“Grandma’s sin was serious,” Dad said. “But your sins are more serious
still, because you were given the truth and have turned from it.”
The room was quiet except for the dull hum of traffic on Oxford Street.
Dad’s eyes were fixed on me. It was the gaze of a seer, of a holy oracle
whose power and authority were drawn from the very universe. I wanted to
meet it head-on, to prove I could withstand its weight, but after a few
seconds something in me buckled, some inner force gave way, and my eyes
dropped to the floor.
“I am called of God to testify that disaster lies ahead of you,” Dad said.
“It is coming soon, very soon, and it will break you, break you utterly. It will
knock you down into the depths of humility. And when you are there, when
you are lying broken, you will call on the Divine Father for mercy.” Dad’s
voice, which had risen to fever pitch, now fell to a murmur. “And He will
not hear you.”
I met his gaze. He was burning with conviction; I could almost feel the
heat rolling off him. He leaned forward so that his face was nearly touching
mine and said, “But I will.”
The silence settled, undisturbed, oppressive.
“I will offer, one final time, to give you a blessing,” he said.
The blessing was a mercy. He was offering me the same terms of
surrender he had offered my sister. I imagined what a relief it must have
been for her, to realize she could trade her reality—the one she shared with
me—for his. How grateful she must have felt to pay such a modest price. I
could not judge her for her choice, but in that moment I knew I could not
choose it for myself. Everything I had worked for, all my years of study, had
been to purchase for myself this one privilege: to see and experience more
truths than those given to me by my father, and to use those truths to
construct my own mind. I had come to believe that the ability to evaluate
many ideas, many histories, many points of view, was at the heart of what it
means to self-create. If I yielded now, I would lose more than an argument. I
would lose custody of my own mind. This was the price I was being asked
to pay, I understood that now. What my father wanted to cast from me
wasn’t a demon: it was me.
Dad reached into his pocket and withdrew a vial of consecrated oil, which
he placed in my palm. I studied it. This oil was the only thing needed to
perform the ritual, that and the holy authority resting in my father’s
misshapen hands. I imagined my surrender, imagined closing my eyes and
recanting my blasphemies. I imagined how I would describe my change, my
divine transformation, what words of gratitude I would shout. The words
were ready, fully formed and waiting to leave my lips.
But when my mouth opened they vanished.
“I love you,” I said. “But I can’t. I’m sorry, Dad.”
My father stood abruptly.
He said again there was an evil presence in my room, that he couldn’t stay
another night. Their flight was not until morning, but Dad said it was better
to sleep on a bench than with the devil.
My mother bustled about the room, shoveling shirts and socks into their
suitcase. Five minutes later, they were gone.
Someone was screaming, a long, steady holler, so loud it woke me up. It
was dark. There were streetlights, pavement, the rumble of distant cars. I
was standing in the middle of Oxford Street, half a block from my dorm
room. My feet were bare, and I was wearing a tank top and flannel pajama
bottoms. It felt like people were gawking at me, but it was two in the
morning and the street was empty.
Somehow I got back into my building, then I sat on my bed and tried to
reconstruct what had happened. I remembered going to sleep. I remembered
the dream. What I did not remember was flying from my bed and sprinting
down the hall and into the street, shouting, but that is what I had done.
The dream had been of home. Dad had built a maze on Buck’s Peak and
trapped me inside it. The walls were ten feet high and made of supplies
from his root cellar—sacks of grain, cases of ammunition, drums of honey. I
was searching for something, something precious I could never replace. I
had to escape the maze to recover it, but I couldn’t find the way out, and
Dad was pursuing me, sealing the exits with sacks of grain stacked into
barricades.
—
I STOPPED GOING TO my French group, then to my sketching class. Instead of
reading in the library or attending lectures, I watched TV in my room,
working my way through every popular series from the past two decades.
When one episode ended, I would begin the next without thinking, the way
one breath follows another. I watched TV eighteen or twenty hours a day.
When I slept I dreamed of home, and at least once a week I awoke standing
in the street in the middle of the night, wondering if it was my own cry that
I’d heard just before waking.
I did not study. I tried to read but the sentences meant nothing. I needed
them to mean nothing. I couldn’t bear to string sentences into strands of
thought, or to weave those strands into ideas. Ideas were too similar to
reflection, and my reflections were always of the expression on my father’s
stretched face the moment before he’d fled from me.
The thing about having a mental breakdown is that no matter how
obvious it is that you’re having one, it is somehow not obvious to you. I’m
fine, you think. So what if I watched TV for twenty-four straight hours
yesterday. I’m not falling apart. I’m just lazy. Why it’s better to think
yourself lazy than think yourself in distress, I’m not sure. But it was better.
More than better: it was vital.
By December I was so far behind in my work that, pausing one night to
begin a new episode of Breaking Bad, I realized that I might fail my PhD. I
laughed maniacally for ten minutes at this irony: that having sacrificed my
family to my education, I might lose that, also.
After a few more weeks of this, I stumbled from my bed one night and
decided that I’d made a mistake, that when my father had offered me the
blessing, I should have accepted it. But it wasn’t too late. I could repair the
damage, put it right.
I purchased a ticket to Idaho for Christmas. Two days before the flight, I
awoke in a cold sweat. I’d dreamed I was in a hospital, lying on crisp white
sheets. Dad was at the foot of the gurney, telling a policeman I had stabbed
myself. Mother echoed him, her eyes panicked. I was surprised to hear
Drew’s voice, shouting that I needed to be moved to another hospital. “He’ll
find her here,” he kept saying.
I wrote to Drew, who was living in the Middle East. I told him I was
going to Buck’s Peak. When he replied his tone was urgent and sharp, as if
he was trying to cut through whatever fog I was living in. My dear Tara, he
wrote. If Shawn stabs you, you won’t be taken to a hospital. You’ll be put in
the basement and given some lavender for the wound. He begged me not to
go, saying a hundred things I already knew and didn’t care about, and when
that didn’t work, he said: You told me your story so I could stop you if you
ever did something crazy. Well, Tara, this is it. This is crazy.
I can still fix this, I chanted as the plane lifted off the tarmac.
—
IT WAS A BRIGHT WINTER morning when I arrived on Buck’s Peak. I
remember the crisp smell of frozen earth as I approached the house and the
feel of ice and gravel crunching beneath my boots. The sky was a shocking
blue. I breathed in the welcome scent of pine.
My gaze dropped below the mountain and my breath caught. When
Grandma had been alive, she had, by nagging, shouting and threats, kept my
father’s junkyard contained. Now refuse covered the farm and was creeping
toward the mountain base. The rolling hills, once perfect lakes of snow,
were dotted with mangled trucks and rusted septic tanks.
Mother was ecstatic when I stepped through the door. I hadn’t told her I
was coming, hoping that, if no one knew, I might avoid Shawn. She talked
rapidly, nervously. “I’m going to make you biscuits and gravy!” she said,
then flew to the kitchen.
“I’ll help in a minute,” I said. “I just need to send an email.”
The family computer was in the old part of the house, what had been the
front room before the renovation. I sat down to write Drew, because I’d
promised, as a kind of compromise between us, that while on the mountain
I would write to him every two hours. I nudged the mouse and the screen
flickered on. The browser was already open; someone had forgotten to sign
out. I moved to open a different browser but stopped when I saw my name.
It was in the message that was open on the screen, which Mother had sent
only moments before. To Shawn’s ex-girlfriend Erin.
The premise of the message was that Shawn had been reborn, spiritually
cleansed. That the Atonement had healed our family, and that all had been
restored. All except me. The spirit has whispered to me the truth about my
daughter, Mother wrote. My poor child has given herself over to fear, and
that fear has made her desperate to validate her misperceptions. I do not
know if she is a danger to our family, but I have reasons to think she might
be.
*
I had known, even before reading the message, that my mother shared my
father’s dark vision, that she believed the devil had a hold of me, that I was
dangerous. But there was something in seeing the words on the page, in
reading them and hearing her voice in them, the voice of my mother, that
turned my body cold.
There was more to the email. In the final paragraph, Mother described the
birth of Emily’s second child, a daughter, who had been born a month
before. Mother had midwifed the child. The birth had taken place at home
and, according to Mother, Emily had nearly bled to death before they could
get to a hospital. Mother finished the story by testifying: God had worked
through her hands that night, she said. The birth was a testament of His
power.
I remembered the drama of Peter’s birth: how he’d slipped out of Emily
weighing little more than a pound; how he’d been such a shocking shade of
gray, they’d thought he was dead; how they’d fought through a snowstorm to
the hospital in town, only to be told it wasn’t enough, and there were no
choppers flying; how two ambulances had been dispatched to McKay-Dee in
Ogden. That a woman with this medical history, a woman so obviously
high-risk, should be advised to attempt a second birth at home seemed
reckless to the point of delusion.
If the first fall was God’s will, whose was the second?
I was still wondering at the birth of my niece when Erin’s response
appeared. You are right about Tara, she said. She is lost without faith. Erin
told Mother that my doubting myself—my writing to her, Erin, to ask if I
might be mistaken, if my memories might be false—was evidence that my
soul was in jeopardy, that I couldn’t be trusted: She is building her life on
fear. I will pray for her. Erin ended the message by praising my mother’s
skill as a midwife. You are a true hero, she wrote.
I closed the browser and stared at the wallpaper behind the screen. It was
the same floral print from my childhood. For how long had I been dreaming
of seeing it? I had come to reclaim that life, to save it. But there was nothing
here to save, nothing to grasp. There was only shifting sand, shifting
loyalties, shifting histories.
I remembered the dream, the maze. I remembered the walls made of
grain sacks and ammunition boxes, of my father’s fears and paranoias, his
scriptures and prophecies. I had wanted to escape the maze with its
disorienting switchbacks, its ever-modulating pathways, to find the precious
thing. But now I understood: the precious thing, that was the maze. That’s
all that was left of the life I’d had here: a puzzle whose rules I would never
understand, because they were not rules at all but a kind of cage meant to
enclose me. I could stay, and search for what had been home, or I could go,
now, before the walls shifted and the way out was shut.
Mother was sliding biscuits into the oven when I entered the kitchen. I
looked around, mentally searching the house. What do I need from this
place? There was only one thing: my memories. I found them under my bed,
in a box, where I had left them. I carried them to the car and put them in the
backseat.
“I’m going for a drive,” I told Mother. I tried to keep my voice smooth. I
hugged her, then took a long look at Buck’s Peak, memorizing every line
and shadow. Mother had seen me take my journals to the car. She must have
known what that meant, must have sensed the farewell in it, because she
fetched my father. He gave me a stiff hug and said, “I love you, you know
that?”
“I do,” I said. “That has never been the issue.”
Those words are the last I said to my father.
—
I DROVE SOUTH; I didn’t know where I was going. It was nearly Christmas. I
had decided to go to the airport and board the next flight to Boston when
Tyler called.
I hadn’t spoken to my brother in months—after what happened with
Audrey, it had seemed pointless to confide in my siblings. I was sure Mother
would have told every brother, cousin, aunt and uncle the story she had told
Erin: that I was possessed, dangerous, taken by the devil. I wasn’t wrong:
Mother had warned them. But then she made a mistake.
After I left Buck’s Peak, she panicked. She was afraid I might contact
Tyler, and that if I did, he might sympathize with me. She decided to get to
Tyler first, to deny anything I might tell him, but she miscalculated. She
didn’t stop to think how the denials would sound, coming from nowhere like
that.
“Of course Shawn didn’t stab Diego and threaten Tara with the knife,”
Mother reassured Tyler, but to Tyler, who had never heard any part of this
story, not from me or anyone else, this was somewhat less than reassuring. A
moment after he said goodbye to Mother, Tyler called me, demanding to
know what had happened and why I hadn’t come to him.
I thought he’d say I was lying but he didn’t. He accepted almost
immediately the reality I’d spent a year denying. I didn’t understand why he
was trusting me, but then he told me his own stories and I remembered:
Shawn had been his older brother, too.
In the weeks that followed, Tyler began to test my parents in the subtle,
nonconfrontational way that was uniquely his. He suggested that perhaps the
situation had been mishandled, that perhaps I was not possessed. Perhaps I
was not evil at all.
I might have taken comfort in Tyler’s trying to help me, but the memory
of my sister was too raw, and I didn’t trust him. I knew that if Tyler
confronted my parents—really confronted them—they would force him to
choose between me and them, between me and the rest of the family. And
from Audrey I had learned: he would not choose me.
—
MY FELLOWSHIP AT HARVARD finished in the spring. I flew to the Middle East,
where Drew was completing a Fulbright. It took some effort, but I managed
to hide from Drew how poorly I was doing, or at least I thought I did. I
probably didn’t. He was, after all, the one chasing me through his flat when I
awoke in the middle of the night, screaming and sprinting, with no idea
where I was but a desperate need to escape it.
We left Amman and drove south. We were in a Bedouin camp in the
Jordanian desert on the day the navy SEALs killed bin Laden. Drew spoke
Arabic, and when the news broke he spent hours in conversation with our
guides. “He’s no Muslim,” they told Drew as we sat on cold sand watching
the dying flames of a campfire. “He does not understand Islam, or he would
not do the terrible things he’s done.”
I watched Drew talk with the Bedouins, heard the strange, smooth sounds
falling from his lips, and was struck by the implausibility of my presence
there. When the twin towers had fallen ten years before, I had never heard of
Islam. Now I was drinking sugary tea with Zalabia Bedouins and squatting
on a sand drift in Wadi Rum, the Valley of the Moon, less than twenty miles
from the Saudi Arabian border.
The distance—physical and mental—that had been traversed in the last
decade nearly stopped my breath, and I wondered if perhaps I had changed
too much. All my studying, reading, thinking, traveling, had it transformed
me into someone who no longer belonged anywhere? I thought of the girl
who, knowing nothing beyond her junkyard and her mountain, had stared at
a screen, watching as two planes sailed into strange white pillars. Her
classroom was a heap of junk. Her textbooks, slates of scrap. And yet she
had something precious that I—despite all my opportunities, or maybe
because of them—did not.
—
I RETURNED TO ENGLAND, where I continued to unravel. My first week back
in Cambridge, I awoke nearly every night in the street, having run there,
shouting, asleep. I developed headaches that lasted for days. My dentist said
I was grinding my teeth. My skin broke out so severely that twice perfect
strangers stopped me in the street and asked if I was having an allergic
reaction. No, I said. I always look like this.
One evening, I got into an argument with a friend about something trivial,
and before I knew what was happening I had pressed myself into the wall
and was hugging my knees to my chest, trying to keep my heart from
leaping out of my body. My friend rushed toward me to help and I
screamed. It was an hour before I could let her touch me, before I could will
myself away from the wall. So that’s a panic attack, I thought the next
morning.
Soon after, I sent a letter to my father. I’m not proud of that letter. It’s full
of rage, a fractious child screaming, “I hate you” at a parent. It’s filled with
words like “thug” and “tyrant,” and it goes on for pages, a torrent of
frustration and abuse.
That is how I told my parents I was cutting off contact with them.
Between insults and fits of temper, I said I needed a year to heal myself;
then perhaps I could return to their mad world to try to make sense of it.
My mother begged me to find another way. My father said nothing.
* The italicized language in the description of the referenced email exchange is paraphrased, not
directly quoted. The meaning has been preserved.
I was failing my PhD.
If I had explained to my supervisor, Dr. Runciman, why I was unable to
work, he would have helped me, would have secured additional funding,
petitioned the department for more time. But I didn’t explain, I couldn’t. He
had no idea why it had been nearly a year since I’d sent him work, so when
we met in his office one overcast July afternoon, he suggested that I quit.
“The PhD is exceptionally demanding,” he said. “It’s okay if you can’t do
it.”
I left his office full of fury at myself. I went to the library and gathered
half a dozen books, which I lugged to my room and arranged on my desk.
But my mind was made nauseous by rational thought, and by the next
morning the books had moved to my bed, where they propped up my laptop
while I worked steadily through Buffy the Vampire Slayer.
—
THAT AUTUMN, TYLER CONFRONTED my father. He talked to Mother first, on
the phone. He called me after and related their conversation. He said Mother
was “on our side,” that she thought the situation with Shawn was
unacceptable and had convinced Dad to do something. “Dad is taking care
of it,” Tyler said. “Everything is going to be fine. You can come home.”
My phone rang again two days later, and I paused Buffy to answer it. It
was Tyler. The whole thing had exploded in his face. He had felt uneasy
after his conversation with Mother, so he had called Dad to see exactly what
was being done about Shawn. Dad had become angry, aggressive. He’d
shouted at Tyler that if he brought this up again, he would be disowned, then
he’d hung up the phone.
I dislike imagining this conversation. Tyler’s stutter was always worse
when he talked to our father. I picture my brother hunched over the receiver,
trying to concentrate, to push out the words that have jammed in his throat,
while his father hurls an arsenal of ugly words.
Tyler was still reeling from Dad’s threat when his phone rang. He thought
it was Dad calling to apologize, but it was Shawn. Dad had told him
everything. “I can have you out of this family in two minutes,” Shawn said.
“You know I can do it. Just ask Tara.”
I listened to Tyler relate this story while staring at the frozen image of
Sarah Michelle Gellar. Tyler talked for a long time, moving through the
events quickly but lingering in a wasteland of rationalization and self recrimination. Dad must have misunderstood, Tyler said. There had been a
mistake, a miscommunication. Maybe it was his fault, maybe he hadn’t said
the right thing in the right way. That was it. He had done this, and he could
repair it.
As I listened, I felt a strange sensation of distance that bordered on
disinterestedness, as if my future with Tyler, this brother I had known and
loved all my life, was a film I had already seen and knew the ending of. I
knew the shape of this drama because I had lived it already, with my sister.
This was the moment I had lost Audrey: this was the moment the costs had
become real, when the tax was levied, the rent due. This was the moment
she had realized how much easier it was to walk away: what a poor trade it
was to swap an entire family for a single sister.
So I knew even before it happened that Tyler would go the same way. I
could hear his hand-wringing through the long echo of the telephone. He
was deciding what to do, but I knew something he did not: that the decision
had already been made, and what he was doing now was just the long work
of justifying it.
It was October when I got the letter.
It came in the form of a PDF attached to an email from Tyler and
Stefanie. The message explained that the letter had been drafted carefully,
thoughtfully, and that a copy would be sent to my parents. When I saw that,
I knew what it meant. It meant Tyler was ready to denounce me, to say my
father’s words, that I was possessed, dangerous. The letter was a kind of
voucher, a pass that would admit him back into the family.
I couldn’t get myself to open the attachment; some instinct had seized my
fingers. I remembered Tyler as he’d been when I was young, the quiet older
brother reading his books while I lay under his desk, staring at his socks and
breathing in his music. I wasn’t sure I could bear it, to hear those words in
his voice.
I clicked the mouse, the attachment opened. I was so far removed from
myself that I read the entire letter without understanding it: Our parents are
held down by chains of abuse, manipulation, and control….They see change
as dangerous and will exile anyone who asks for it. This is a perverted idea
of family loyalty….They claim faith, but this is not what the gospel teaches.
Keep safe. We love you.
From Tyler’s wife, Stefanie, I would learn the story of this letter, how in
the days after my father had threatened disownment, Tyler had gone to bed
every night saying aloud to himself, over and over, “What am I supposed to
do? She’s my sister.”
When I heard this story, I made the only good decision I had made for
months: I enrolled in the university counseling service. I was assigned to a
sprightly middle-aged woman with tight curls and sharp eyes, who rarely
spoke in our sessions, preferring to let me talk it out, which I did, week after
week, month after month. The counseling did nothing at first—I can’t think
of a single session I would describe as “helpful”—but their collective power
over time was undeniable. I didn’t understand it then, and I don’t understand
it now, but there was something nourishing in setting aside that time each
week, in the act of admitting that I needed something I could not provide for
myself.
Tyler did send the letter to my parents, and once committed he never
wavered. That winter I spent many hours on the phone with him and
Stefanie, who became a sister to me. They were available whenever I needed
to talk, and back then I needed to talk quite a lot.
Tyler paid a price for that letter, though the price is hard to define. He was
not disowned, or at least his disownment was not permanent. Eventually he
worked out a truce with my father, but their relationship may never be the
same.
I’ve apologized to Tyler more times than I can count for what I’ve cost
him, but the words are awkwardly placed and I stumble over them. What is
the proper arrangement of words? How do you craft an apology for
weakening someone’s ties to his father, to his family? Perhaps there aren’t
words for that. How do you thank a brother who refused to let you go, who
seized your hand and wrenched you upward, just as you had decided to stop
kicking and sink? There aren’t words for that, either.
—
WINTER WAS LONG THAT YEAR, the dreariness punctuated only by my weekly
counseling sessions and the odd sense of loss, almost bereavement, I felt
whenever I finished one TV series and had to find another.
Then it was spring, then summer, and finally as summer turned to fall, I
found I could read with focus. I could hold thoughts in my head besides
anger and self-accusation. I returned to the chapter I had written nearly two
years before at Harvard. Again I read Hume, Rousseau, Smith, Godwin,
Wollstonecraft and Mill. Again I thought about the family. There was a
puzzle in it, something unresolved. What is a person to do, I asked, when
their obligations to their family conflict with other obligations—to friends,
to society, to themselves?
I began the research. I narrowed the question, made it academic, specific.
In the end, I chose four intellectual movements from the nineteenth century
and examined how they had struggled with the question of family
obligation. One of the movements I chose was nineteenth-century
Mormonism. I worked for a solid year, and at the end of it I had a draft of
my thesis: “The Family, Morality, and Social Science in Anglo-American
Cooperative Thought, 1813–1890.”
The chapter on Mormonism was my favorite. As a child in Sunday
school, I’d been taught that all history was a preparation for Mormonism:
that every event since the death of Christ had been fashioned by God to
make possible the moment when Joseph Smith would kneel in the Sacred
Grove and God would restore the one true church. Wars, migrations, natural
disasters—these were mere preludes to the Mormon story. On the other
hand, secular histories tended to overlook spiritual movements like
Mormonism altogether.
My dissertation gave a different shape to history, one that was neither
Mormon nor anti-Mormon, neither spiritual nor profane. It didn’t treat
Mormonism as the objective of human history, but neither did it discount
the contribution Mormonism had made in grappling with the questions of
the age. Instead, it treated the Mormon ideology as a chapter in the larger
human story. In my account, history did not set Mormons apart from the rest
of the human family; it bound them to it.
I sent Dr. Runciman the draft, and a few days later we met in his office.
He sat across from me and, with a look of astonishment, said it was good.
“Some parts of it are very good,” he said. He was smiling now. “I’ll be
surprised if it doesn’t earn a doctorate.”
As I walked home carrying the heavy manuscript, I remembered
attending one of Dr. Kerry’s lectures, which he had begun by writing, “Who
writes history?” on the blackboard. I remembered how strange the question
had seemed to me then. My idea of a historian was not human; it was of
someone like my father, more prophet than man, whose visions of the past,
like those of the future, could not be questioned, or even augmented. Now,
as I passed through King’s College, in the shadow of the enormous chapel,
my old diffidence seemed almost funny. Who writes history? I thought. I do.
—
ON MY TWENTY-SEVENTH BIRTHDAY, the birthday I had chosen, I submitted
my PhD dissertation. The defense took place in December, in a small,
simply furnished room. I passed and returned to London, where Drew had a
job and we’d rented a flat. In January, nearly ten years to the day since I’d
set foot in my first classroom at BYU, I received confirmation from the
University of Cambridge: I was Dr. Westover.
I had built a new life, and it was a happy one, but I felt a sense of loss that
went beyond family. I had lost Buck’s Peak, not by leaving but by leaving
silently. I had retreated, fled across an ocean and allowed my father to tell
my story for me, to define me to everyone I had ever known. I had conceded
too much ground—not just the mountain, but the entire province of our
shared history.
It was time to go home.
It was spring when I arrived in the valley. I drove along the highway to the
edge of town, then pulled over at the drop-off overlooking the Bear River.
From there I could look out over the basin, a patchwork of expectant fields
stretching to Buck’s Peak. The mountain was crisp with evergreens, which
were luminous set against the browns and grays of shale and limestone. The
Princess was as bright as I’d ever seen her. She stood facing me, the valley
between us, radiating permanence.
The Princess had been haunting me. From across the ocean I’d heard her
beckoning, as if I were a troublesome calf who’d wandered from her herd.
Her voice had been gentle at first, coaxing, but when I didn’t answer, when I
stayed away, it had turned to fury. I had betrayed her. I imagined her face
contorted with rage, her stance heavy and threatening. She had been living
in my mind like this for years, a deity of contempt.
But seeing her now, standing watch over her fields and pastures, I realized
that I had misunderstood her. She was not angry with me for leaving,
because leaving was a part of her cycle. Her role was not to corral the
buffalo, not to gather and confine them by force. It was to celebrate their
return.
—
I BACKTRACKED A QUARTER mile into town and parked beside Grandma-over in-town’s white picket fence. In my mind it was still her fence, even though
she didn’t live here anymore: she had been moved to a hospice facility near
Main Street.
I had not seen my grandparents in three years, not since my parents had
begun telling the extended family that I was possessed. My grandparents
loved their daughter. I was sure they had believed her account of me. So I
had surrendered them. It was too late to reclaim Grandma—she was
suffering from Alzheimer’s and would not have known me—so I had come
to see my grandfather, to find out whether there would be a place for me in
his life.
We sat in the living room; the carpet was the same crisp white from my
childhood. The visit was short and polite. He talked about Grandma, whom
he had cared for long after she ceased to recognize him. I talked about
England. Grandpa mentioned my mother, and when he spoke of her it was
with the same look of awe that I had seen in the faces of her followers. I
didn’t blame him. From what I’d heard, my parents were powerful people in
the valley. Mother was marketing her products as a spiritual alternative to
Obamacare, and she was selling product as fast as she could make it, even
with dozens of employees.
God had to be behind such a wondrous success, Grandpa said. My parents
must have been called by the Lord to do what they have done, to be great
healers, to bring souls to God. I smiled and stood to go. He was the same
gentle old man I remembered, but I was overwhelmed by the distance
between us. I hugged him at the door, and gave him a long look. He was
eighty-seven. I doubted whether, in the years he had left, I would be able to
prove to him that I was not what my father said I was, that I was not a
wicked thing.
—
TYLER AND STEFANIE LIVED a hundred miles north of Buck’s Peak, in Idaho
Falls. It was there I planned to go next, but before leaving the valley, I wrote
my mother. It was a short message. I said I was nearby and wanted her to
meet me in town. I wasn’t ready to see Dad, I said, but it had been years
since I’d seen her face. Would she come?
I waited for her reply in the parking lot at Stokes. I didn’t wait long.
It pains me that you think it is acceptable to ask this. A wife does not go
where her husband is not welcome. I will not be party to such blatant
disrespect.
*
The message was long and reading it made me tired, as if I’d run a great
distance. The bulk of it was a lecture on loyalty: that families forgive, and
that if I could not forgive mine, I would regret it for the rest of my life. The
past, she wrote, whatever it was, ought to be shoveled fifty feet under and
left to rot in the earth.
Mother said I was welcome to come to the house, that she prayed for the
day when I would run through the back door, shouting, “I’m home!”
I wanted to answer her prayer—I was barely more than ten miles from the
mountain—but I knew what unspoken pact I would be making as I walked
through that door. I could have my mother’s love, but there were terms, the
same terms they had offered me three years before: that I trade my reality
for theirs, that I take my own understanding and bury it, leave it to rot in the
earth.
Mother’s message amounted to an ultimatum: I could see her and my
father, or I would never see her again. She has never recanted.
—
THE PARKING LOT HAD filled while I was reading. I let her words settle, then
started the engine and pulled onto Main Street. At the intersection I turned
west, toward the mountain. Before I left the valley, I would set eyes on my
home.
Over the years I’d heard many rumors about my parents: that they were
millionaires, that they were building a fortress on the mountain, that they
had hidden away enough food to last decades. The most interesting, by far,
were the stories about Dad hiring and firing employees. The valley had
never recovered from the recession; people needed work. My parents were
one of the largest employers in the county, but from what I could tell Dad’s
mental state made it difficult for him to maintain employees long-term:
when he had a fit of paranoia, he tended to fire people with little cause.
Months before, he had fired Diane Hardy, Rob’s ex-wife, the same Rob
who’d come to fetch us after the second accident. Diane and Rob had been
friends with my parents for twenty years. Until Dad fired Diane.
It was perhaps in another such fit of paranoia that Dad fired my mother’s
sister Angie. Angie had spoken to Mother, believing her sister would never
treat family that way. When I was a child it had been Mother’s business;
now it was hers and Dad’s together. But at this test of whose it was really,
my father won: Angie was dismissed.
It is difficult to piece together what happened next, but from what I later
learned, Angie filed for unemployment benefits, and when the Department
of Labor called my parents to confirm that she had been terminated, Dad
lost what little reason remained to him. It was not the Department of Labor
on the phone, he said, but the Department of Homeland Security, pretending
to be the Department of Labor. Angie had put his name on the terrorist
watch list, he said. The Government was after him now—after his money
and his guns and his fuel. It was Ruby Ridge all over again.
I pulled off the highway and onto the gravel, then stepped out of the car
and gazed up at Buck’s Peak. It was clear immediately that at least some of
the rumors were true—for one, that my parents were making huge sums of
money. The house was massive. The home I’d grown up in had had five
bedrooms; now it had been expanded in all directions and looked as though
it had at least forty.
It would only be a matter of time, I thought, before Dad started using the
money to prepare for the End of Days. I imagined the roof lined with solar
panels, laid out like a deck of cards. “We need to be self-sufficient,” I
imagined Dad would say as he dragged the panels across his titanic house.
In the coming year, Dad would spend hundreds of thousands of dollars
buying equipment and scouring the mountain for water. He didn’t want to be
dependent on the Government, and he knew Buck’s Peak must have water, if
he could only find it. Gashes the size of football fields would appear at the
mountain base, leaving a desolation of broken roots and upturned trees
where once there had been a forest. He was probably chanting, “Got to be
self-reliant” the day he climbed into a crawler and tore into the fields of satin
wheat.
—
GRANDMA-OVER-IN-TOWN DIED ON MOTHER’S Day.
I was doing research in Colorado when I heard the news. I left
immediately for Idaho, but while traveling realized I had nowhere to stay. It
was then that I remembered my aunt Angie, and that my father was telling
anyone who would listen that she had put his name on a terrorist watch list.
Mother had cast her aside; I hoped I could reclaim her.
Angie lived next door to my grandfather, so again I parked along the
white picket fence. I knocked. Angie greeted me politely, the way Grandpa
had done. It was clear that she had heard much about me from my mother
and father in the past five years.
“I’ll make you a deal,” I said. “I’ll forget everything my dad has said
about you, if you’ll forget everything he’s said about me.” She laughed,
closing her eyes and throwing back her head in a way that nearly broke my
heart, she looked so much like my mother.
I stayed with Angie until the funeral.
In the days before the service, my mother’s siblings began to gather at
their childhood home. They were my aunts and uncles, but some of them I
hadn’t seen since I was a child. My uncle Daryl, who I barely knew,
suggested that his brothers and sisters should spend an afternoon together at
a favorite restaurant in Lava Hot Springs. My mother refused to come. She
would not go without my father, and he would have nothing to do with
Angie.
It was a bright May afternoon when we all piled into a large van and set
off on the hour-long drive. I was uncomfortably aware that I had taken my
mother’s place, going with her siblings and her remaining parent on an
outing to remember her mother, a grandmother I had not known well. I soon
realized that my not knowing her was wonderful for her children, who were
bursting with remembrances and loved answering questions about her. With
every story my grandmother came into sharper focus, but the woman taking
shape from their collective memories was nothing like the woman I
remembered. It was then I realized how cruelly I had judged her, how my
perception of her had been distorted, because I’d been looking at her
through my father’s harsh lens.
During the drive back, my aunt Debbie invited me to visit her in Utah.
My uncle Daryl echoed her. “We’d love to have you in Arizona,” he said. In
the space of a day, I had reclaimed a family—not mine, hers.
The funeral was the next day. I stood in a corner and watched my siblings
trickle in.
There were Tyler and Stefanie. They had decided to homeschool their
seven children, and from what I’d seen, the children were being educated to
a very high standard. Luke came in next, with a brood so numerous I lost
count. He saw me and crossed the room, and we made small talk for several
minutes, neither of us acknowledging that we hadn’t seen each other in half
a decade, neither of us alluding to why. Do you believe what Dad says about
me? I wanted to ask. Do you believe I’m dangerous? But I didn’t. Luke
worked for my parents, and without an education, he needed that job to
support his family. Forcing him to take a side would only end in heartache.
Richard, who was finishing a PhD in chemistry, had come down from
Oregon with Kami and their children. He smiled at me from the back of the
chapel. A few months before, Richard had written to me. He’d said he was
sorry for believing Dad, that he wished he’d done more to help me when I
needed it, and that from then on, I could count on his support. We were
family, he said.
Audrey and Benjamin chose a bench near the back. Audrey had arrived
early, when the chapel was empty. She had grabbed my arm and whispered
that my refusing to see our father was a grave sin. “He is a great man,” she
said. “For the rest of your life you will regret not humbling yourself and
following his counsel.” These were the first words my sister had said to me
in years, and I had no response to them.
Shawn arrived a few minutes before the service, with Emily and Peter and
a little girl I had never met. It was the first time I had been in a room with
him since the night he’d killed Diego. I was tense, but there was no need. He
did not look at me once during the service.
My oldest brother, Tony, sat with my parents, his five children fanning out
in the pew. Tony had a GED and had built a successful trucking company in
Las Vegas, but it hadn’t survived the recession. Now he worked for my
parents, as did Shawn and Luke and their wives, as well as Audrey and her
husband, Benjamin. Now I thought about it, I realized that all my siblings,
except Richard and Tyler, were economically dependent on my parents. My
family was splitting down the middle—the three who had left the mountain,
and the four who had stayed. The three with doctorates, and the four without
high school diplomas. A chasm had appeared, and was growing.
—
A YEAR WOULD PASS before I would return to Idaho.
A few hours before my flight from London, I wrote to my mother—as I
always did, as I always will do—to ask if she would see me. Again, her
response was swift. She would not, she would never, unless I would see my
father. To see me without him, she said, would be to disrespect her husband.
For a moment it seemed pointless, this annual pilgrimage to a home that
continued to reject me, and I wondered if I should go. Then I received
another message, this one from Aunt Angie. She said Grandpa had canceled
his plans for the next day, and was refusing even to go to the temple, as he
usually did on Wednesdays, because he wanted to be at home in case I came
by. To this Angie added: I get to see you in about twelve hours! But who’s
counting?
* The italicized language in the description of the referenced exchange is paraphrased, not directly
quoted. The meaning has been preserved.
When I was a child, I waited for my mind to grow, for my experiences to
accumulate and my choices to solidify, taking shape into the likeness of a
person. That person, or that likeness of one, had belonged. I was of that
mountain, the mountain that had made me. It was only as I grew older that I
wondered if how I had started is how I would end—if the first shape a
person takes is their only true shape.
As I write the final words of this story, I’ve not seen my parents in years,
since my grandmother’s funeral. I’m close to Tyler, Richard and Tony, and
from them, as well as from other family, I hear of the ongoing drama on the
mountain—the injuries, violence and shifting loyalties. But it comes to me
now as distant hearsay, which is a gift. I don’t know if the separation is
permanent, if one day I will find a way back, but it has brought me peace.
That peace did not come easily. I spent two years enumerating my father’s
flaws, constantly updating the tally, as if reciting every resentment, every
real and imagined act of cruelty, of neglect, would justify my decision to cut
him from my life. Once justified, I thought the strangling guilt would release
me and I could catch my breath.
But vindication has no power over guilt. No amount of anger or rage
directed at others can subdue it, because guilt is never about them. Guilt is
the fear of one’s own wretchedness. It has nothing to do with other people.
I shed my guilt when I accepted my decision on its own terms, without
endlessly prosecuting old grievances, without weighing his sins against
mine. Without thinking of my father at all. I learned to accept my decision
for my own sake, because of me, not because of him. Because I needed it,
not because he deserved it.
It was the only way I could love him.
When my father was in my life, wrestling me for control of that life, I
perceived him with the eyes of a soldier, through a fog of conflict. I could
not make out his tender qualities. When he was before me, towering,
indignant, I could not remember how, when I was young, his laugh used to
shake his gut and make his glasses shine. In his stern presence, I could never
recall the pleasant way his lips used to twitch, before they were burned
away, when a memory tugged tears from his eyes. I can only remember
those things now, with a span of miles and years between us.
But what has come between me and my father is more than time or
distance. It is a change in the self. I am not the child my father raised, but he
is the father who raised her.
If there was a single moment when the breach between us, which had
been cracking and splintering for two decades, was at last too vast to be
bridged, I believe it was that winter night, when I stared at my reflection in
the bathroom mirror, while, without my knowing it, my father grasped the
phone in his knotted hands and dialed my brother. Diego, the knife. What
followed was very dramatic. But the real drama had already played out in
the bathroom.
It had played out when, for reasons I don’t understand, I was unable to
climb through the mirror and send out my sixteen-year-old self in my place.
Until that moment she had always been there. No matter how much I
appeared to have changed—how illustrious my education, how altered my
appearance—I was still her. At best I was two people, a fractured mind. She
was inside, and emerged whenever I crossed the threshold of my father’s
house.
That night I called on her and she didn’t answer. She left me. She stayed
in the mirror. The decisions I made after that moment were not the ones she
would have made. They were the choices of a changed person, a new self.
You could call this selfhood many things. Transformation.
Metamorphosis. Falsity. Betrayal.
I call it an education.
For Tyler
To my brothers Tyler, Richard and Tony I owe the greatest debt for making
this book possible, first in the living of it, then in the writing of it. From
them and their wives, Stefanie, Kami and Michele, I learned much of what I
know about family.
Tyler and Richard in particular were generous with their time and their
memories, reading multiple drafts, adding their own details, and in general
helping me make the book as accurate as possible. Though our perspectives
may have differed in some particulars, their willingness to verify the facts of
this story enabled me to write it.
Professor David Runciman encouraged me to write this memoir and was
among the first to read the manuscript. Without his confidence in it, I might
never have had confidence in it myself.
I am grateful to those who make books their life’s work and who gave a
portion of that life to this book: my agents, Anna Stein and Karolina Sutton;
and my wonderful editors, Hilary Redmon and Andy Ward at Random
House, and Jocasta Hamilton at Hutchinson; as well as the many other
people who worked to edit, typeset and launch this story. Most notably,
Boaty Boatwright at ICM was a tireless champion. Special thanks are owed
to Ben Phelan, who was given the difficult task of fact-checking this book,
and who did so rigorously but with great sensitivity and professionalism.
I am especially grateful to those who believed in this book before it was a
book, when it was just a jumble of home-printed papers. Among those early
readers are Dr. Marion Kant, Dr. Paul Kerry, Annie Wilding, Livia
Gainham, Sonya Teich, Dunni Alao and Suraya Sidhi Singh.
My aunts Debbie and Angie came back into my life at a crucial moment,
and their support means everything. For believing in me, always, thanks to
Professor Jonathan Steinberg. For granting me haven, emotional as well as
practical, in which to write this book, I am indebted to my dear friend, Drew
Mecham.
Certain footnotes have been included to give a voice to memories that
differ from mine. The notes concerning two stories—Luke’s burn and
Shawn’s fall from the pallet—are significant and require additional
commentary.
In both events, the discrepancies between accounts are many and varied.
Take Luke’s burn. Everyone who was there that day either saw someone
who wasn’t there, or failed to see someone who was. Dad saw Luke, and
Luke saw Dad. Luke saw me, but I did not see Dad and Dad did not see me.
I saw Richard and Richard saw me, but Richard did not see Dad, and neither
Dad nor Luke saw Richard. What is one to make of such a carousel of
contradiction? After all the turning around and round, when the music
finally stops, the only person everyone can agree was actually present that
day is Luke.
Shawn’s fall from the pallet is even more bewildering. I was not there. I
heard my account from others, but was confident it was true because I’d
heard it told that way for years, by many people, and because Tyler had
heard the same story. He remembered it the way I did, fifteen years later. So
I put it in writing. Then this other story appeared. There was no waiting, it
insists. The chopper was called right away.
I’d be lying if I said these details are unimportant, that the “big picture” is
the same no matter which version you believe. These details matter. Either
my father sent Luke down the mountain alone, or he did not; either he left
Shawn in the sun with a serious head injury, or he did not. A different father,
a different man, is born from those details.
I don’t know which account of Shawn’s fall to believe. More remarkably, I
don’t know which account of Luke’s burn to believe, and I was there. I can
return to that moment. Luke is on the grass. I look around me. There is no
one else, no shadow of my father, not even the idea of him pushing in on the
periphery of my memory. He is not there. But in Luke’s memory he is there,
laying him gently in the bathtub, administering a homeopathic for shock.
What I take from this is a correction, not to my memory but to my
understanding. We are all of us more complicated than the roles we are
assigned in the stories other people tell. This is especially true in families.
When one of my brothers first read my account of Shawn’s fall, he wrote to
me: “I can’t imagine Dad calling 911. Shawn would have died first.” But
maybe not. Maybe, after hearing his son’s skull crack, the desolate thud of
bone and brain on concrete, our father was not the man we thought he would
be, and assumed he had been for years after. I have always known that my
father loves his children and powerfully; I have always believed that his
hatred of doctors was more powerful. But maybe not. Maybe, in that
moment, a moment of real crisis, his love subdued his fear and hatred both.
Maybe the real tragedy is that he could live in our minds this way, in my
brother’s and mine, because his response in other moments—thousands of
smaller dramas and lesser crises—had led us to see him in that role. To
believe that should we fall, he would not intervene. We would die first.
We are all more complicated than the roles we are assigned in stories.
Nothing has revealed that truth to me more than writing this memoir—
trying to pin down the people I love on paper, to capture the whole meaning
of them in a few words, which is of course impossible. This is the best I can
do: to tell that other story next to the one I remember. Of a summer day, a
fire, the smell of charred flesh, and a father helping his son down the
mountain.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
TARA WESTOVER was born in Idaho in 1986. She received her BA from Brigham Young
University in 2008 and was subsequently awarded a Gates Cambridge Scholarship. She earned an
MPhil from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 2009, and in 2010 was a visiting fellow at Harvard
University. She returned to Cambridge, where she was awarded a PhD in history in 2014. Educated is
her first book.
tarawestover.com
Facebook.com/TaraWestoverLit
Twitter: @tarawestover
Wat’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.
Sign up now.